time,region,category,text
1970-05-20,national,overall,"This initial report of economic conditions in the 12 Federal Reserve Districts is based on information gathered from directors of the Reserve Banks, conversations with local bankers, businessmen and economists, regular monthly surveys of manufacturing and trade industries conducted by some of the Reserve Banks, and selected statistical measures of regional economic activity. This initial report of economic conditions in the 12 Federal Reserve Districts is based on information gathered from directors of the Reserve Banks, conversations with local bankers, businessmen and economists, regular monthly surveys of manufacturing and trade industries conducted by some of the Reserve Banks, and selected statistical measures of regional economic activity. Reports from the Reserve Banks clearly indicate that the current overriding domestic concern is inflation. Businessmen contacted generally expect that prices will continue to increase at a rapid rate during the remainder of the year. There appears to be considerable skepticism regarding the ability of economic stabilization policies to achieve a significant reduction in the rate of inflation without generating an intolerable level of unemployment or a full-scale recession. Similarly, there is evidence of extensive concern about the persistence of strong upward wage pressures, despite some easing in labor markets. Thewage-push problem is particularly acute in the construction industries. Some of the other major factors that are contributing to an underlying tone of pessimism regarding the business situation are prospects for a continued squeeze on corporate profits, concern about the tight liquidity position of some firms, the recent decline in the stock market, and domestic social unrest. There appears to be no consensus as to whether the economy is actually in a recession—or when the floor of the current slowdown will be realized. Views range from expectations of a further and deeper deterioration in real economic activity to beliefs that recovery is already in progress. The trucking strikes and lockouts have seriously disrupted business conditions in some areas, particularly in the Midwest. Several Districts noted that construction projects have been impeded because of steel shortages, and also because of widespread strikes in the building trades unions. There are also signs that some firms are postponing or stretching out capital spending projects where feasible."
1970-06-17,national,overall,"Comments on economic conditions in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that in most Districts bankers and businessmen find economic activity has been weakening, and they generally expected the decline will continue. In virtually all Districts, unemployment is rising, and in many, labor markets are easing noticeably. Retail trade is weaker almost everywhere, and consumers are ""downgrading"" and bargain-hunting. A few Districts report large cuts in capital spending. In a number of Districts, special note was made of the profit squeeze that is affecting many businesses, and in some, concern was expressed about a decline in corporate liquidity. Mention was again made in several Districts of the dangers from wage and price developments, and in four Districts a substantial number of respondents reportedly favor some sort of incomes policy. Comments on economic conditions in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that in most Districts bankers and businessmen find economic activity has been weakening, and they generally expected the decline will continue. In virtually all Districts, unemployment is rising, and in many, labor markets are easing noticeably. Retail trade is weaker almost everywhere, and consumers are ""downgrading"" and bargain-hunting. A few Districts report large cuts in capital spending. In a number of Districts, special note was made of the profit squeeze that is affecting many businesses, and in some, concern was expressed about a decline in corporate liquidity. Mention was again made in several Districts of the dangers from wage and price developments, and in four Districts a substantial number of respondents reportedly favor some sort of incomes policy. In only one Federal Reserve District, St. Louis, was recent economic activity regarded as ""good""; and in Kansas City it was deemed fair to good. In most Districts, activity has weakened significantly, and a decline in new orders was noted in three Districts. Expectations of a further decline are widespread. These range, however, from the belief that the bottom will come in the third or fourth quarter of this year, to the belief of the directors of the Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank that the contraction will be ""more prolonged and deeper than most economists and public policy makers are currently expecting"". A growth in unemployment is noticeable throughout the country, in some Districts only mildly, but in others strongly. Until recently, many firms were reducing their work forces simply by letting ""attrition"" take its toll, but now firms are ""furloughing"" workers, ""cutting back"" their staffs, and ""pushing"" early retirements. In a. few Districts, even ""quality"" labor has begun to be available. An easier market is noted for, among others, ""middle management"" and ""professional"" types and one District remarked upon an ""extremely sharp increase"" in unsolicited summaries from applicants with ""extensive experience"". Very few exceptions were noted to the general pattern of weakness in retail sales and of ""downgrading"" and bargain hunting. Department stores seemed to be particularly hard hit by the softening of demand, while discount stores and ""bargain basements"" were holding up well. Weakness was particularly strong in furniture, appliances, television sets, and clothing. Auto buying was an area where ""downgrading"" was especially intense—except in Dallas. The trend was heavily to cheaper models, stripped-down models, ""compacts"", low-priced imports, and late-model used cars. Outside the auto field, in the few Districts where no ""downgrading"" was apparent, consumers nevertheless had a sharp eye out for ""sales"" and ""specials"". In the San Francisco District, a ""strong"" demand for mobile homes was interpreted as possibly a form of ""downgrading"". In two Districts, Richmond and St. Louis, capital spending plans continue strong, out of ""fear"" of inflation or to offset increased labor costs. However, in the five other Districts that made reference to the subject, many firms are making substantial cutbacks. Among the comments: General Motors is making ""huge"" cutbacks, a ""large retail organization"" is cutting back by 50 percent, a ""large oil company"" is ""continuously"" reviewing its plans, in the Philadelphia District there has been a ""marked"" cutback since April, and in the New York District some firms are reviewing their plans for the ""second or third time this year"". Inventory holdings were specifically mentioned by half of the Districts. They were regarded as ""excessive"" in two of the Districts, and were being ""reduced"" in a third. In two others they were at a ""satisfactory"" level, partly because firms were working on a ""hand-to-mouth"" basis. In another District, reference was to merchandising firms, which were being ""extremely cautious"" regarding their fall and winter stocks. The profit squeeze is hitting many businesses very hard in many parts of the country. The situation is aggravated by a liquidity squeeze. Slow payment on accounts receivable was mentioned by both Chicago and New York as one of the reasons for this latter development. Because of their uncomfortable situation, many business firms have embarked on cost-cutting programs (including the reduction of staffs, of inventories, of advertising, and of capital spending). In the New York District, it was reported that many companies may not be able to ""meet their maturities"" and that some ""substantial"" companies would be unable to ""meet their payrolls without refinancing"". The liquidity squeeze is having repercussions in the commercial paper market. Some commercial paper dealers have told corporate customers they can no longer handle their issues. Among financial concerns that are troubled by their own liquidity situation are some life insurance companies. The latter were reported as wishing to increase their liquidity and therefore not seeking any new long-term investment outlets. Concern about continuing inflationary pressures, particularly arising from large wage hikes, was mentioned in several Districts, although some price declines were noted in Cleveland (machine tool and aluminum industries) and in Richmond (textiles and furniture). Respondents in some Districts expressed disillusionment with ""conventional"" stabilization measures or with the ""Administration's economic policies"", and a few Districts reported there was considerable sentiment in favor of some kind of incomes policy. In one District it was reported that some labor leaders noted confidentially that guidelines would provide them with""an excuse to argue for lower wage settlements"" than their members are currently ready to consider."
1970-07-15,national,overall,"Current comment by businessmen and bankers, as reported by the 12 Reserve Banks, continues to emphasize weakness in overall business activity and to focus on such problems as unemployment, rising costs, declining profits, inadequate liquidity, and excessive inventories. In most Districts, however, the general tone of the comment is less pessimistic than a month ago. While some Reserve Banks report a further softening of activity through June and early July, most indicate a growing consensus among businessmen that the worst of the latest decline has passed and that the economy is now bottoming out. Expressions of concern over the state of corporate liquidity continue numerous and apprehensions over the possibility of serious financial disorders persist. But on both counts, fears appear to be distinctly less pronounced than at the time of the last FOMC meeting. Current comment by businessmen and bankers, as reported by the 12 Reserve Banks, continues to emphasize weakness in overall business activity and to focus on such problems as unemployment, rising costs, declining profits, inadequate liquidity, and excessive inventories. In most Districts, however, the general tone of the comment is less pessimistic than a month ago. While some Reserve Banks report a further softening of activity through June and early July, most indicate a growing consensus among businessmen that the worst of the latest decline has passed and that the economy is now bottoming out. Expressions of concern over the state of corporate liquidity continue numerous and apprehensions over the possibility of serious financial disorders persist. But on both counts, fears appear to be distinctly less pronounced than at the time of the last FOMC meeting. Of the 12 Reserve Banks, Boston characterizes the tenor of business comment in its District as ""markedly more optimistic than a month ago"" and is joined by Atlanta in emphasizing elements of strength in the local business picture. Cleveland also notes a marked improvement in June, attributed mainly to the termination of strike activity, but indicates a distinctly pessimistic outlook for July and for the near-term future. In the remaining Districts, comment on current conditions is predominantly bearish. St. Louis, which last month characterized current conditions as ""good,"" now reports ""some dampening of optimism in recent weeks."" Reports from Minneapolis and Dallas also suggest some further softening of activity as compared with a month ago. As for the outlook for the rest of the year, sentiment in most Districts appears to be veering increasingly towards a belief that recovery from the current decline will be gradual and that only a modest business expansion can be expected. Comments on business spending suggest some further cutbacks or stretch-outs in capital plans of manufacturers and retailers. Specific reference to such cutbacks or stretch-outs is made in the reports from New York, Atlanta, Cleveland, and St. Louis, with Chicago noting declines in the orders of capital goods producers. The St. Louis report, which indicates cutbacks only among retailers, is notable for its contrast with the bullish outlook for capital plans reported by that District in the last Redbook. Boston and Richmond continue to report no substantial evidence of any significant scaling down of capital plans. About half the Districts indicate some degree of inventory excess, with four reporting inventories as higher than desired while others say that businessmen are actively holding the line on inventories. Cleveland's latest survey shows a sizable reduction in stocks in June and San Francisco reports that business demand for inventory loans has fallen off. Consumer demand is indicated as less than buoyant in a number of Districts, although New York notes that retail buying seems fairly well sustained. San Francisco reports that personal bankruptcies are increasing and that retail sales in the Twelfth District are likely to decline. An apparent increase in the rate of saving by consumers is noted in the Philadelphia District, while Minneapolis and Richmond report some downgrading in the quality of consumer purchases. Other Districts describe the demand for automobiles as concentrated mainly in the less expensive models. Comment on the employment situation is most bearish in St. Louis, Chicago, and Minneapolis, where major firms are said to have stopped all hiring or to be considering additional layoffs. Philadelphia also expects further increases in unemployment and San Francisco reports the continuation of serious unemployment in the Pacific Northwest, with some increases in layoffs in Southern California and Arizona. But in the Boston, Cleveland, and Richmond Districts the employment situation appears to have stabilized and no significant further cutbacks are expected. Atlanta also reports ""no serious deterioration"" in prospects for employment. Some instances of price shading are reported in all Districts except Boston, although some Districts indicate that the practice remains fairly rare. Only Richmond and Dallas report widespread price shading. Most frequently mentioned items on which some shading is noted include industrial goods, such as some chemicals, lumber, steel, and nonferrous metals. Other items cited are synthetic fibers, glass, lubricants, and large capital items. Among consumer goods, automobiles and large appliances are mentioned. Some easing of prices is evident, especially in the New York District, but Chicago reports that some prices are higher and Cleveland says that most prices are ""firm or firming upward."" San Francisco and St. Louis report that inflationary expectations continue strong among businessmen. Most District reports mention corporate liquidity as a serious problem, but none describe it as critical. Several reports state that demand for bank loans by business continues strong. In two Districts, some finance companies and industrial firms that have been squeezed out of the commercial paper market are finding accommodation at commercial banks. The squeeze on corporate profits is also listed as a continuing problem in a majority of Districts. Firms reportedly have had little success in containing rising costs, and the expectation of continued wage pressure apparently is widespread among businessmen."
1970-08-12,national,overall,"The consensus of the reports by the twelve Federal Reserve Banks is that the economy is in a sidewise movement with few signs of strength in any sector. Businessmen have generally become more cautious with respect to plans for the remaining months of the year. Instead of an early vigorous recovery as envisaged by some in earlier reports, business leaders now view the outlook less optimistically. Profits have declined and many firms have responded with cost cutting measures, including employment cutbacks, reduced inventories, and in some instances a reduction in planned capital investment. The consensus of the reports by the twelve Federal Reserve Banks is that the economy is in a sidewise movement with few signs of strength in any sector. Businessmen have generally become more cautious with respect to plans for the remaining months of the year. Instead of an early vigorous recovery as envisaged by some in earlier reports, business leaders now view the outlook less optimistically. Profits have declined and many firms have responded with cost cutting measures, including employment cutbacks, reduced inventories, and in some instances a reduction in planned capital investment. Most Districts report ""sluggishness"" in sales with few optimistic comments. Although total retail sales appear to be holding their own, the volume is generally below expectations, and inventories are being evaluated carefully. Consumer durables are generally the sector hardest hit, with television sets and large appliances moving very slowly. Both New York and Minneapolis mention retarded sales of newer clothing fashions, while St. Louis and Boston indicate that the shoe industry is facing declining sales. Several Districts report that consumers are switching to lower quality merchandise in response to rising prices. The lower sales in some lines were apparently offset by a continued uptrend in sales of food and a few other products, such as steel, domestic oil, and automobiles. Most Reserve Banks report that although labor markets are relatively weak, unions have won major wage increases. Unemployment appears to be rising slowly. Most reductions in labor usage are taking place through normal attrition, unpaid vacations, and shorter workweeks. Some of the unemployment, however, has resulted from plant closings and layoffs. In Richmond, skilled labor is reported in short supply. Unemployment of skilled workers is reported by both Boston and Chicago. Rising prices, expectations of higher prices, and wage costs continue to plague most business respondents despite the weaker labor market. There is virtually total agreement that prices are rising and will continue to do so as labor unions continue to secure higher wages. This factor was mentioned by more than half the Reserve Banks. Cleveland specifically indicated the high construction wage settlements, which point to further increases in home prices. Price ""shading"" is reported by some Reserve Banks, but such practices are apparently of only limited extent. Nevertheless, cautious optimism is expressed by some that the fight against inflation is making progress, and one bank reports prospective weakness in livestock product prices in the coming months. Reports of the Reserve Banks are varied concerning credit demands. There is increasing caution on the part of lenders with respect to both large and small borrowers. Over half the reports mention the rising concern by commercial banks for borrower liquidity. Philadelphia reports a more comfortable feeling by businessmen with respect to liquidity while San Francisco reports neither improvement nor worsening of liquidity conditions. Although most firms are carrying out announced expansion programs, there has been a decline in new announcements. Nearly every District indicates that capital spending is expected to decline in the coming year. Caught between wage and salary hikes and a more-or-less constant level of demand, there is increasing pessimism regarding recovery of business profits."
1970-09-09,national,overall,"The reports in this Redbook are more optimistic than in earlier months. The consensus of directors, businessmen, bankers, and economists is that the economy will experience below potential growth in real output in the second half of 1970 and early 1971. There is general agreement that wage demands are not diminishing, despite an easing in labor markets and prospects for further increases in unemployment. Concern about inflation remains widespread, and the directors at one Reserve bank explicitly express the hope that the FOMC would permit only moderate growth in the money and credit aggregates over the near term. The reports in this Redbook are more optimistic than in earlier months. The consensus of directors, businessmen, bankers, and economists is that the economy will experience below potential growth in real output in the second half of 1970 and early 1971. There is general agreement that wage demands are not diminishing, despite an easing in labor markets and prospects for further increases in unemployment. Concern about inflation remains widespread, and the directors at one Reserve bank explicitly express the hope that the FOMC would permit only moderate growth in the money and credit aggregates over the near term. Housing and consumer durables, especially household goods, are evidently recovering, but the capital goods sector is sluggish. Indications are that the metalworking machinery industry has not yet seen the bottom of its recent decline. Districts in which machine tool producers are concentrated (Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago) specifically mention depressed conditions in that industry. Six Reserve banks referred to the impact of cutbacks in defense and aerospace industries. There are reports of selective price cutting at both the retail and the wholesale level and indications that price increases are becoming less prevalent. Cleveland reports price reductions in metal cutting machine tools and appliances; Minneapolis cites large price discounts to dealers by farm machinery producers; and Atlanta notes price weakening in some types of textile machinery. Philadelphia expresses concern about the likely effect of the corn blight on agricultural prices, but Chicago reports that the damage caused by the blight may have been exaggerated. Four Reserve banks specifically mention the improved liquidity positions of commercial banks in recent weeks. There are also reports of improved loan to deposit ratios and deposit flows, some limited softening in the demand for business loans, and scattered reports that borrowers are expecting lower interest, rates in the months ahead."
1970-10-14,national,overall,"The predominant view of businessmen and bankers in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts is that the economy has not yet returned to a faster rate of expansion. There are both elements of support for further expansion and of weakness. For example, consumer spending is being maintained in most areas, yet the rate of increase is below that achieved last year and expected sales targets are not being achieved. Construction activity also remains at its current levels with a mixed picture of good demand in some areas and poor in others. The situation in capital goods seems to have stabilized with few cases of further reductions being mentioned, although there is little evidence of a general recovery in capital expenditures. It appears that business men are waiting for stronger evidence that the economy has begun its recovery. The predominant view of businessmen and bankers in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts is that the economy has not yet returned to a faster rate of expansion. There are both elements of support for further expansion and of weakness. For example, consumer spending is being maintained in most areas, yet the rate of increase is below that achieved last year and expected sales targets are not being achieved. Construction activity also remains at its current levels with a mixed picture of good demand in some areas and poor in others. The situation in capital goods seems to have stabilized with few cases of further reductions being mentioned, although there is little evidence of a general recovery in capital expenditures. It appears that business men are waiting for stronger evidence that the economy has begun its recovery. A major source of uncertainty concerns the future course of the General Motors strike. The immediate impact is currently greatest in the Chicago and Cleveland Districts, where unemployment is rising as a direct consequence of the strike. Industries supplying the automobile industry are also beginning to be affected; glass, tire, and steel production is being cut back. In the other Districts, there have been some increases in unemployment in areas with GM assembly plants and some reports of reduced auto sales, but the repercussions for the moment have been small. Other labor disputes are creating problems: in Kansas City with a drawn-out construction strike and in Minneapolis with the Northwest Airlines strike. Businessmen and bankers in other Districts remain concerned about continued wage increases, especially in the construction industry, and, according to a report from the Chicago District, the ""huge number and variety of demands by the unions."" On the other hand, there are signs of a moderation in union demands noted in the Boston District. Unemployment continues to rise both as a consequence of the GM strike and layoffs in other industries. Among the other industries reported as having further reduced their work forces are machine tools (Cleveland, Boston), furniture (Richmond, Atlanta), textiles (Richmond, Atlanta), and metals (Richmond, Chicago). Aerospace employment continues to be low and to be the major depressing influence in such cities as Seattle. There are offsetting forces in other industries which are expanding. In particular, companies in coal mining, railroad-car and large truck parts report growing sales. Capital expenditures show little sign of recovery in prospect. Most Districts report that few large projects are being planned until there is a stronger recovery. Current capital expenditures are being stretched out or delayed. Similarly, other costs are subject to close scrutiny. Inventory reductions have not quite ended. There are reports from the Richmond, Chicago, and Philadelphia Districts that indicate there is little sign of a shift toward a building-up of inventories. The construction industry is still maintaining its overall volume but with considerable variation in the pace and type of local activity. In general, nonresidential construction remains strong. The major weakness in most areas is in residential, particularly single-family homes. There has been a slight increase in the availability of mortgage funds in some areas, but not in others. There has been little or no reduction in mortgage rates. Consumer spending has been maintained but it seems to be below retailers' expectations in most areas. There are some exceptions—for example, one major New York City department store reports a steady improvement and tourist expenditures are heavy in the Boston District. The net impression is that in most Districts retail activity is only at a moderate rate. Agricultural trends suggest the possibility of higher food prices. The effect of heavy rains and the spread of corn blight point toward a reduction in some crops, which will tend to push up prices. The corn blight has seriously reduced the corn crop in the Kansas City District but apparently has caused only a minor reduction in the crop in the St. Louis District. Nonetheless, the expectation is that the reduced supply of cattle feed will tend to push up meat prices in the future. The Dallas District reports that a survey of thirty-one city and county finance offices indicates a continued increase in local government expenditures and borrowing in the coming year. The financial situation has moved toward greater ease. Most banks have experienced an inflow of deposits. The banks in some Districts are making somewhat more business loans but without any substantial change in their lending requirements. In other cases, the banks used the funds to rebuild their liquidity."
1970-11-11,national,overall,"Current comment by businessmen and bankers, as reported by the twelve Reserve Banks, is decidedly more pessimistic than that of a month ago. The pervasive dampening effect of the General Motors strike is evident in most parts of the country. Employment continues to weaken, or at best, to show sluggish growth, in most Districts, while unemployment is reportedly rising further in several areas. On balance, reports emphasize continued weakness in consumer spending, and some further cutbacks or stretchouts of capital spending plans. Reports are mixed on the behavior of prices, but strong upward wage pressures continue to restrain any widespread belief that inflation will soon be under control. Residential construction activity is improving somewhat in parts of the country, but reports vary widely as to the degree of the recovery. Inflows of savings to financial institutions continue to grow, and somewhat easier mortgage terms seem to be available. Loan demand by consumers, potential home builders, and businesses is reported to be weak on balance, and is aggravated by problems in specific areas and industries. Current comment by businessmen and bankers, as reported by the twelve Reserve Banks, is decidedly more pessimistic than that of a month ago. The pervasive dampening effect of the General Motors strike is evident in most parts of the country. Employment continues to weaken, or at best, to show sluggish growth, in most Districts, while unemployment is reportedly rising further in several areas. On balance, reports emphasize continued weakness in consumer spending, and some further cutbacks or stretchouts of capital spending plans. Reports are mixed on the behavior of prices, but strong upward wage pressures continue to restrain any widespread belief that inflation will soon be under control. Residential construction activity is improving somewhat in parts of the country, but reports vary widely as to the degree of the recovery. Inflows of savings to financial institutions continue to grow, and somewhat easier mortgage terms seem to be available. Loan demand by consumers, potential home builders, and businesses is reported to be weak on balance, and is aggravated by problems in specific areas and industries. In the past month, there has been some widening of the impact of the General Motors strike upon the economy. The two Districts in which the effect is most direct are Chicago and Cleveland, although the Chicago report indicates that after adjusting for the strike, economic activity in that District is level to slightly up. Seven out of the ten major metropolitan areas in the Cleveland District, however, are adversely affected, and other Districts—New York, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Dallas—trace either direct or indirect dampening effects to the strike. The Philadelphia report contains the suggestion that the underlying economic trend is weaker than generally acknowledged, and perhaps too much blame is placed upon the strike. Numerous other strikes have had widespread effects as well—construction workers in Kansas City; carpenters, household appliances, construction machinery, and other autos in the Chicago District; and airlines in the Minneapolis District. Weakness in the employment picture is traceable to strikes as well as to cutbacks in government spending affecting the aerospace and aircraft industries in the Atlanta and San Francisco Districts. Also blamed for layoffs are cutbacks in business capital spending affecting the machine tool industry in the Boston and Cleveland Districts, and the computer industry in the Cleveland and Minneapolis Districts. Slackening steel production is a source of weakness in the Cleveland District, and the textile industry has accounted for some sluggishness in the Richmond and Atlanta Districts. A less-than-seasonal buildup of employment by retailers is also mentioned. District reports describe consumer spending variously from satisfactory to very bad. The consensus is clearly less than satisfactory, particularly for ""big ticket"" items. Only the Chicago District describes the outlook for consumer durable purchases as optimistic. Retailers' inventories are generally being held down, and holiday season buildups are apparently lower than usual. Residential construction is reported to be improved in the St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City Districts. In the latter case, the improvement follows a prolonged strike in several of the building trades. Residential building continues weak, however, in the Boston, Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco Districts. While the liquidity positions of financial institutions are reported to have improved, the consensus of the reports is that loan demand remains weak. In some Districts this is reported to have led to greater investment in municipal securities by banks, and there is some speculation about the possibility of an imminent cut in the prime rate. Some moderation in the growth of prices is mentioned in the Richmond, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco reports. In some areas, consumers are continuing to shift to lower-to-medium priced goods, and price shading of consumer items is reported. Concern continues to be voiced, however, about the problem of controlling inflation in view of recent labor settlements which have resulted in large wage increases, for example, in the St. Louis and Kansas City Districts. Increases in gas and electric utility rates and in prices of public services are of concern in the Atlanta District. The potential need for incomes policies in order to control inflation in the face of rising unemployment and continued upward pressure on wages is mentioned by respondents to surveys in the Boston and Philadelphia Districts."
1970-12-09,national,overall,"Opinions expressed by bankers and businessmen in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that the more pessimistic economic outlook which had emerged last month was currently still in evidence, with some brighter spots—notably in residential housing—appearing here and there. Economic recovery was generally expected to be sluggish and more prolonged than had been anticipated earlier. Holiday retail sales so far were characterized as only fair to disappointing. Most manufacturers contacted reported unchanged or somewhat lower output and orders than last month, and in general looked for only a moderate pickup in the coming months. Concomitantly, there were further increases in unemployment in most Districts and additional reports of trimming of plant and equipment outlays. At the same time, it was generally felt that little or no progress was being achieved in curbing inflation, and sentiments for the adoption of an incomes policy or for other additional action by the Administration appeared to be growing. Opinions expressed by bankers and businessmen in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that the more pessimistic economic outlook which had emerged last month was currently still in evidence, with some brighter spots—notably in residential housing—appearing here and there. Economic recovery was generally expected to be sluggish and more prolonged than had been anticipated earlier. Holiday retail sales so far were characterized as only fair to disappointing. Most manufacturers contacted reported unchanged or somewhat lower output and orders than last month, and in general looked for only a moderate pickup in the coming months. Concomitantly, there were further increases in unemployment in most Districts and additional reports of trimming of plant and equipment outlays. At the same time, it was generally felt that little or no progress was being achieved in curbing inflation, and sentiments for the adoption of an incomes policy or for other additional action by the Administration appeared to be growing. A cautious consumer attitude remains in evidence. With the holiday season getting under way, sales have begun to pick up. Most retailers, however, look for business to be about the same as last year—in some instances worse and in others significantly better. Thus, reflecting the difficulties in the aerospace and timber industries, sales in the Seattle area were particularly depressed. Virtually all retailers contacted in the Boston District reported very disappointing Christmas sales, while in Philadelphia the physical volume of sales in large department stores were down 10 percent from a year ago. On the other hand, retailers in some states—Colorado, Michigan, Wisconsin, Montana—look for a significant improvement over last year's holiday sales. As in previous months, ""down grading"", and ""bargain hunting""remained in evidence, and higher priced items continued to perform poorly. Industrial production remains weak. 
Most manufacturers contacted reported no change or some decline as compared with last month in output, sales, and new orders and, in general, look for only a moderate pickup in the coming months. Further slowdowns were evident in the machine tools, electronic, and business equipment industries (notably in the Boston and Chicago Districts) and in the aerospace and timber industries (San Francisco), but the weakness also extended to other industries. Some rebound in December was expected in the Cleveland and Chicago Districts, which had been particularly hard hit by the General Motors strike. However, reports from the steel industry in the Cleveland District reveal that the release of steel stockpiled for General Motors has so far been smaller than expected. Moreover, those steel economists that were contacted felt that inventory stockpiling by steel users against the possibility of a strike in the steel industry next year would begin later than during previous strike-hedging periods, with the ""big push"" coming only late in the pre-strike period. The Minneapolis Bank's industrial expectation survey, for the first time in 13 surveys, showed a year-to-year decline in District manufacturing sales. On the other hand, considerable optimism was expressed in the Chicago District with respect to prospects for all major classes of consumer durable goods; capital goods producers in that District, however, were generally more apprehensive than a few months ago. The slowdown in industrial production was reflected in a further weakening in the employment picture. Further layoffs and short time were evident in most Districts, with areas where particularly depressed industries—such as the aerospace, timber, machine tool, and certain nonferrous metal industries—loom large in the local economy being particularly hard hit. Unemployment among white collar workers and professionals continues to rise. For example, a professional engineering society in the Minneapolis District reported that 10 percent of the engineers in the Twin Cities were out of work. On the other hand, the rate of decline in employment was reported to be slowing down in the Richmond District, while reports from the Chicago Bank suggest little further change, with a rise in employment in consumer durable goods and construction industries offsetting potential layoffs in other sectors. With respect to plant and equipment outlays, there was some evidence of further trimming or stretching-out of original plans. However, since manufacturers have now been cutting back on their original planned capital outlays for several months, the rate of reduction appears to be tapering off. On balance, the outlook is for little change in such outlays from current levels over the next six months. One bright spot in the overall economic picture was provided by actual and prospective developments in residential construction, with most bankers and businessmen expecting a good to strong recovery in this sector. On the price front, scattered price concessions by manufacturers were reported in some Districts. Further strong upward pressure on prices, however, was widely anticipated in the face of increased labor costs. In this context, several Districts reported that bankers and other businessmen feel the GM settlement will affect forthcoming labor negotiations. Durable goods producers in the Chicago District with negotiations still pending are expecting to be under great pressure to follow the GM pattern, while in the Atlanta District, the aluminum industry is reported to be fearful it may have to settle on similar terms. The majority of respondents thus look for inadequate growth and inadequate moderation of inflation. Against this background, several Districts report growing sentiment for stronger action by the Administration. The Philadelphia Bank reports a feeling among directors and others than an incomes policy is worth trying, sentiment for wage and price controls was expressed by directors of the Atlanta bank, while a number of directors and others in the New York District felt the need for additional action by the Administration to solve the employment-inflation problem."
1971-01-12,national,overall,"Business conditions in the nation as viewed by businessmen and other observers of economic conditions in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts were slightly improved in late December and early January compared with a month earlier. Retailers report a sizable late spurt in Christmas sales, pushing the dollar volume above expected levels and well above levels of a year ago. However, the recent sales record has not been followed by reported intentions to expand inventories or to increase demand for factory output. The employment situation remains weak and the number of job seekers continues to grow. Some moderate gains are envisioned for industrial output in the months ahead, but capital investment plans continue to be pared. Credit availability is increasing with the rising liquidity of financial firms. Rising prices and price expectations continue to prevail, leading to intensive discussion of additional means of curtailing further advances. Output of most farm products, notably meats, was higher at the close of the year than a year ago, resulting in relatively low food prices and declining farm incomes. Business conditions in the nation as viewed by businessmen and other observers of economic conditions in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts were slightly improved in late December and early January compared with a month earlier. Retailers report a sizable late spurt in Christmas sales, pushing the dollar volume above expected levels and well above levels of a year ago. However, the recent sales record has not been followed by reported intentions to expand inventories or to increase demand for factory output. The employment situation remains weak and the number of job seekers continues to grow. Some moderate gains are envisioned for industrial output in the months ahead, but capital investment plans continue to be pared. Credit availability is increasing with the rising liquidity of financial firms. Rising prices and price expectations continue to prevail, leading to intensive discussion of additional means of curtailing further advances. Output of most farm products, notably meats, was higher at the close of the year than a year ago, resulting in relatively low food prices and declining farm incomes. Most Federal Reserve banks reported sharp increases in retail sales just prior to the Christmas holidays, which resulted in total dollar sales well above planned levels, and, in some cases, 5 to 6 per cent higher than a year ago. Pre-Christmas sales apparently started off slow but began to rise sharply just before the holidays, and the higher sales volume is extending into the new year. The sales gains were predominantly in the lower priced items. Higher priced items such as color TV sets and high quality clothing continue to move slowly. Retailers report that inventories of most goods remain at very conservative levels, indicating considerable doubt that the recent upturn in sales will continue. Manufacturers are cautiously optimistic compared with the fact that no change was foreseen a month ago. The Cleveland Bank reports that new steel orders have increased sharply since mid-December. Furthermore, steel industry economists expect a big pickup in steel shipments to begin about March and the second quarter to be much stronger than the first. Much of this anticipated gain is based on rising demand in preparation for a steel strike. The Richmond Bank reported an increase in manufacturers' inventories. With the exception of the steel companies, however, manufacturers generally do not indicate great gains in sales expectations. In conformity with this view, some layoffs and plant closings have recently occurred in the electronics and TV industries. Most Reserve banks indicate that the current high rate of unemployment is likely to continue for several months. Further declines in employment, however, are not expected as most reports indicate that the retrenchment process of firms is about complete. Any future increases in the unemployment rate will primarily reflect additions to the labor force rather than layoffs. Most reports point to some moderate gains in construction in the months ahead. Reasons given include the more favorable interest rates and easier payment terms. Capital investment plans apparently continue to be pared. The Richmond Bank reports that manufacturing respondents often cite excess productive capacity as a problem. The Chicago Reserve Bank reports that a number of important firms have decided to keep capital outlays at or below depreciation in 1971. Cleveland reports that the 1971 authorized plant and equipment appropriation of a large rubber firm is only 60 per cent of the 1970 level of actual expenditure. Excluding public utilities, there are no reports of major industrial expansion plans, and when new investment is mentioned, it is in connection with cautious and conservative planning. All respondents concur that credit became increasingly available in the closing weeks of 1970. Savings inflows at banks and savings and loan companies have been very high in recent months. Business loan demand has been declining, and reports of more aggressive lending policies are more frequent than heretofore. Inflation and expectations of inflation continue to be a major worry of most businessmen. Practical means offered for stabilizing prices, however, vary widely from one Reserve District to another. Dallas, for example, reports that some form of incomes policy is generally favored as the solution, while Atlanta and Minneapolis report respondents varying from adamant opposition to an incomes policy to support for the adoption of some type of controls. A leveling out or decline in farm income may be in prospect for the months ahead. Low meat and poultry prices and higher priced feed have reduced profit margins to livestock producers. The large numbers of livestock on farms, however, have resulted in a high level of marketings despite the higher production costs. Readjustments in livestock numbers will likely occur during 1971, resulting in higher returns to farmers and higher food prices."
1971-02-03,national,overall,"Reports from the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that there has been no material change in economic conditions. Output and employment appear to have leveled off after recent declines and, despite some optimism that a recovery will begin later in the year, the overall impression is that economic activity is at much the same level as the previous month. Price rises are still expected to continue, though at a lower rate, and employment to increase relatively slowly. Reports from the twelve Federal Reserve Districts indicate that there has been no material change in economic conditions. Output and employment appear to have leveled off after recent declines and, despite some optimism that a recovery will begin later in the year, the overall impression is that economic activity is at much the same level as the previous month. Price rises are still expected to continue, though at a lower rate, and employment to increase relatively slowly. One reason for the lack of an immediate recovery is that consumer spending has not picked up uniformly. In most districts, consumers are still cost-conscious, responding to sales, but not willing to make new major expenditures. At best, retail sales are described as ""more buoyant"" (New York) and, at worst, ""sluggish"" (Dallas). But more common are reports that ""sales are slightly ahead of last year"" (St. Louis) or ""reasonably good"" (Kansas City). Automobile sales in particular are not strong. In many Districts, they are disappointing and below what was expected after the settlement of the General Motors strike. Demand is concentrated in the lower-priced compact and subcompact models, and there is no expectation of a boom year for new car sales in 1971. Only in the Richmond and St. Louis Districts are sharp increases reported and, in the former case, the increase is a recovery from the strike-induced slump. The lack of strong demand is reflected in automobile production. General Motors has reduced overtime schedules and the other automobile producers are operating at reduced levels. Manufacturing shows no sign of a general recovery. There are industries which report a rise in output (containers, furniture, steel, some machine tools, and textiles), but other industries are still retrenching. Although major layoffs of workers are occurring less often, companies are continuing to reduce their workforces through attrition or unpaid holidays. Increased hiring is still not widespread. Investment plans similarly are restrained and expenditures on capital equipment in 1971 are expected to be at about the same level as last year. Even rising new orders for steel are not a reflection of an upturn in the economy but rather represent hedging against either a steel strike or further price rises. According to steel industry economists, overall production for this year will not be above last year. There is one sector which has favorable prospects for recovery. The demand for residential housing is picking up and sales of existing houses are increasing. Nonresidential construction is not as strong at the moment, and in many areas it is quite weak. But the net effect is to increase demand for the output of the building-materials industries and timber. In the San Francisco District, companies in these industries are already beginning to expand production and make heavier capital expenditures. An important factor in this expected recovery is the fall in mortgage rates. The lower mortgage rates are part of the general decline of interest rates. Nevertheless, the slow-pace of overall economic activity has meant that demand, particularly the demand for business loans, has not responded to the lower rates. Banks are continuing to lower the rates they pay for funds. CD rates have already fallen in line with other market rates, and many banks are not looking for time deposits. Rates have been cut on savings-type certificates in such Districts as Philadelphia, Atlanta, and San Francisco; in the Chicago District sales of these certificates have been restricted or eliminated. There is pressure on passbook savings rates and some bankers advocate the lowering of rate ceilings for savings accounts. Wage increases are still common and retail prices are continuing to creep up. But there are reports of price cuts (nonferrous metals, for example), and price shading (plastics, some oil products, and transformers), while other prices are higher (building materials and farm products). Forecasts for the coming year of business and academic economists reported by Cleveland and Boston are for a GNP below that forecast by the Council of Economic Advisers. The CEA has forecast a GNP of $1,065 billion for 1971; the other forecasts reported were $1,045 billion by Cleveland and $1,047 billion by Boston. The economists' view on unemployment were also more pessimistic than those of CEA. The general view of bankers and businessmen is that rising prices will continue to be a problem for the rest of the year without much easing of wage pressures or any major increase in employment."
1971-03-09,national,overall,"There is substantial agreement among bankers, businessmen, and economists that the recovery now underway is of moderate proportions and is clearly not strong enough to have a significant impact on the employment-unemployment situation over the near term. Despite the persistence of underlying slack in the economy, the Reserve Banks note little retardation of the rise in both industrial and consumer prices. In view of the sluggish demand conditions in the capital goods sector and disappointing retail sales, it appears that cost-push influences continue to fuel the inflationary momentum. Some recent financial developments mirror the sluggishness in the real sector. Bankers report that loan demand is relatively weak. They are concerned over the decline in short term interest rates, and there is widespread agreement that the System should not move toward further monetary ease at this time. There is substantial agreement among bankers, businessmen, and economists that the recovery now underway is of moderate proportions and is clearly not strong enough to have a significant impact on the employment-unemployment situation over the near term. Despite the persistence of underlying slack in the economy, the Reserve Banks note little retardation of the rise in both industrial and consumer prices. In view of the sluggish demand conditions in the capital goods sector and disappointing retail sales, it appears that cost-push influences continue to fuel the inflationary momentum. Some recent financial developments mirror the sluggishness in the real sector. Bankers report that loan demand is relatively weak. They are concerned over the decline in short term interest rates, and there is widespread agreement that the System should not move toward further monetary ease at this time. With few exceptions, the Reserve Banks report that retail trade in January and February was not particularly strong. The post-strike rebound in auto sales thus far appears to be less robust than expected. Both San Francisco and Kansas City commented on the cost-conscious auto buyer. Sales of small cars (foreign and domestic compacts) are providing the major impetus to an otherwise lackluster auto picture. A number of Reserve Banks mentioned, in one form or another, that restoration of consumer confidence is the key element in the business picture. According to the Boston Bank, retail credit men in Rhode Island attribute cautious consumer spending to unemployment and the fear of layoffs. Dallas comments that bankers in their district feel continued inflation has tended to dampen consumer confidence and spending. The Banks uniformly report that current and prospective capital spending remains weak, except for the push stemming from the utilities. Businessmen want to see concrete evidence of a solid upturn in economic activity before they begin to increase capital outlays. Cleveland mentioned that recovery in computers and machine tools is not expected until yearend or early 1972, while Boston notes that prospects are now better for a pickup in machine tools by yearend. The only areas consistently mentioned by the Reserve Banks as exhibiting strength were capital expenditures by utilities, steel production, and residential construction. Boston, however, commented that improvement in housing related industries has been disappointing. As mentioned by Cleveland in the last Red Book, Chicago and Kansas City this time attribute part of the strength in the steel industry to buying in anticipation of expected price increases. Concerning the outlook for employment and unemployment, there are widespread indications that businesses plan to continue with cautious hiring policies (and in some instances plan further layoffs). As is the case for capital spending, there is a reluctance to hire additional employees until the recovery gathers momentum. On the financial front, the Reserve Banks generally report weak loan demand from consumers and businesses. The exceptions are a pickup in mortgage demand and in loans to finance steel stockpiling. Bankers are generally concerned about the decline in short-term interest rates and a developing profit squeeze. Atlanta mentioned that reductions in interest rates and increases in the availability of credit are encouraging signs for auto sales and construction. Cleveland directors specifically noted that they would oppose any further cuts in the discount rate because of an expected adverse reaction from foreign central bankers. The academic economists from Boston urge no further ease in monetary policy."
1971-04-06,national,overall,"While this month's district Redbook reports are conflicting on several points, their general tenor must be judged pessimistic. Nearly half the districts reported increasing signs of recovery, but an equal number characterized business and employment conditions as unchanged or deteriorating from January-February levels. When weighted for firmness of conviction, the April responses emerge as clearly bearish. While this month's district Redbook reports are conflicting on several points, their general tenor must be judged pessimistic. Nearly half the districts reported increasing signs of recovery, but an equal number characterized business and employment conditions as unchanged or deteriorating from January-February levels. When weighted for firmness of conviction, the April responses emerge as clearly bearish. On the employment front, the Cleveland, New York and Chicago districts reported that unemployment seems to be rising, while most other districts reported no change or nearly imperceptible improvement. Several districts cited continued layoffs in a wide variety of occupations, and others described continuing efforts at payroll trimming via reduced recruiting activity and inaction in replacing normal losses from attrition. Labor militancy in current and forthcoming contract negotiations was reported to vary widely among districts. Consumer caution remains readily apparent in all but the Richmond district. Even allowing for the later Easter this year, March retail sales have been disappointing. Consumer cost consciousness remains conspicuous, and no convincing evidence of a recovery in auto demand can be found. Individual district respondents continue to stress awareness of unemployment and layoffs as the major explanatory factor in consumer behavior, suggesting that there is no compelling reason why a consumer resurgence should be imminent. In the manufacturing sector, several districts reported that 1971 shipments levels in major regional industries are showing some pickup over midwinter lows. In many cases, however, increased shipments are proceeding at the expense of diminished backlogs. Chicago and Boston districts both reported severely depressed conditions in the machine tool industry, with no current prospects for improvement over 1971. No common trend in industrial pricing is identifiable as district Directors report news of increased price shading as well as expected price rises. Five districts report continuing austerity in industrial capital spending plans, although the Atlanta district discerns the early signs of a recovery in this area. Most districts report a substantial pickup in residential mortgage demand, but only Richmond, San Francisco and St. Louis were able to attribute this to definite strength in residential construction. Increased mortgage demand elsewhere seems heavily based on a flurry of sales of existing structures. New York district respondents are less optimistic about single family residential construction activity now than a month ago. Loan demand at commercial banks was reported higher in three districts, and unchanged to lower in five others. Deposit inflows are uniformly characterized as heavy relative to loan demand. Six districts now report cuts in passbook savings rates at major commercial banks, and bankers in other districts are considering cuts while watching market developments. Banking Directors in three districts took note of a developing profit squeeze in the commercial banking sector as a result of interest rate developments. Countering this nationwide trend are banks in the Kansas City and St. Louis districts, which have not dropped rates to date. Banking respondents in the Philadelphia district expect no substantial declines in long rates over the coming months, citing continuing corporate funding needs and the addition of an ""inflationary factor"" to projections of borrowing requirements. A Director of the New York bank, on the other hand, noted that SEC registrations for corporate bond issues—while still high—are tapering off and that a lighter calendar can be expected to develop. Academic respondents in the Boston district concurred with the latter view, projecting a fall in long-term corporate rates to below 7 percent by summer."
1971-05-05,national,overall,"The overall impression that emerges from the Districts Red Book reports is that the economic outlook has taken distinct, albeit moderate, turn for the better over the past month. Among the most encouraging developments is the evidence emanating from most parts of the country that the long awaited rise in consumer spending may finally be getting underway, even though an underlying note of caution characterizes most discussion of consumer attitudes. Several Districts reports also point to strong residential construction activity. On the other hand, while businessmen may be more optimistic than a month ago, business confidence has not as yet grown to the point where firms are rushing to build up inventories, nor is there much, if any, evidence of an upward revision in planned outlays for plant and equipment. Moreover, apart from a few scattered signs of improvement, the unemployment picture remains rather bleak. Finally, continued concern over inflation was expressed by a number of respondents in several of the Districts. The overall impression that emerges from the Districts Red Book reports is that the economic outlook has taken distinct, albeit moderate, turn for the better over the past month. Among the most encouraging developments is the evidence emanating from most parts of the country that the long awaited rise in consumer spending may finally be getting underway, even though an underlying note of caution characterizes most discussion of consumer attitudes. Several Districts reports also point to strong residential construction activity. On the other hand, while businessmen may be more optimistic than a month ago, business confidence has not as yet grown to the point where firms are rushing to build up inventories, nor is there much, if any, evidence of an upward revision in planned outlays for plant and equipment. Moreover, apart from a few scattered signs of improvement, the unemployment picture remains rather bleak. Finally, continued concern over inflation was expressed by a number of respondents in several of the Districts. Turning to consumer spending, all Districts report some improvement over the past month. In most instances, however, the increases in retail sales are characterized as ""slight"" or ""moderate"", and the consumer is usually described as still cautious, and cost conscious. The Boston Bank, for example, reports that retail sales in New England seem to have picked up somewhat, but that the consumer has by no means ""broken out"". Reports on retail trade in the Chicago District were more favorable than earlier in the year, but the improvement is characterized as modest. Similarly, the San Francisco Bank reports that retail sales are rising at a moderate pace but that in general retailers expect no major jump in consumer spending at this time. Some of the reports, however, are more optimistic. The Philadelphia Bank states that retailers report a noticeable pickup in sales, even though consumers remain bargain conscious. The St. Louis Bank reports that retail sales picked up considerably in the week before Easter and have remained at the higher level since then, with clothing and appliances moving well and with a strong demand for automobiles. All respondents in the Minneapolis and New York Districts expressing an opinion on this topic felt that the retail sales picture had improved as compared to earlier in the year, and a special survey of leading department stores in the Atlanta District reveal that sales have been exceeding expectations. Residential construction also continues to be a bright spot in the economic outlook-indeed perhaps a brighter one than earlier in the year. The Richmond Bank thus reports that the majority of banking respondents throughout the District feel a sustained surge in residential construction, as well as a revival in nonresidential construction, is underway, while Chicago reports that prospects for residential construction appear even stronger than in earlier months. Similarly optimistic assessments appear in several other District reports. Along with the pick up in retail sales and the sustained strength in the construction industry, there are reports of an increase in manufacturers sales and orders in a number of areas throughout the country. The Philadelphia Bank, for example, reports that a recent poll of area industrialists shows that for April almost four times as many firms registered increases in sales and new orders than showing decreases, while the Cleveland Bank's latest survey of Fourth District manufacturers points to further improvement in March, particularly in new orders, shipments, and backlogs. That Bank's report, however, cautions that some tapering off in the rate of gain may have occurred in April. A more rapid expansion of industrial production, however, has been inhibited by the fact that business confidence, although stronger than earlier in the year, has not as yet risen to the point where manufacturers and retailers are willing to aggressively build up inventories, but prefer to maintain stocks at current levels. Thus, the San Francisco Bank reports that, apart from stock piling of steel, and some rise in building materials inventories, there is little evidence that businesses are rebuilding inventories. The Richmond Bank reports an actual decline on balance, in both manufacturers and retailers inventories, while the St. Louis Bank reports that retail inventories have not been increased. Opinions are mixed among the Banks that discuss the unemployment picture in their District. The Kansas City Bank feels that the employment situation is still soft and that only a modest improvement is expected in the coming months. Similarly most respondents in the Dallas Bank District thought that unemployment in that area would not decline much, if at all, over the balance of the year. Unemployment is apparently continuing to rise in the Chicago area, while the Cleveland Bank characterizes the demand for labor as sluggish. On the other hand, signs of some, if only tentative, improvement can be found in the reports of the Philadelphia, Richmond and St. Louis Banks. Most Districts reported a firming of demand for bank loans, especially consumer and mortgage loans, but in several instances business loans as well. In general, loans continue to be readily available."
1971-06-02,national,overall,"Four major impressions emerge from this month's Red Book reports. First, inflationary expectations remain strong and, in some areas, may be strengthening. Second, demand for business and mortgage loans has firmed, and additional interest rate increases are anticipated. Third, several reports characterize the recovery of spending and production as being gradual. Finally, the reports indicate slightly more optimism in the economic outlook. Four major impressions emerge from this month's Red Book reports. First, inflationary expectations remain strong and, in some areas, may be strengthening. Second, demand for business and mortgage loans has firmed, and additional interest rate increases are anticipated. Third, several reports characterize the recovery of spending and production as being gradual. Finally, the reports indicate slightly more optimism in the economic outlook. The most commonly cited subject in this month's reports was strong inflationary expectations. Opinions are that there are no prospects for a significant reduction in inflation this year. Philadelphia reports that inflationary expectations seem to be somewhat stronger than they were a few weeks ago and that most businessmen believe that inflation is the number one problem facing the nation. Fifty business economists participating in a Round Table discussion at the Cleveland Bank have upped their estimated 1971 rise in the GNP deflator from 4.2 percent (estimated on January 29) to 4.7 percent (estimated on May 27). These economists also expect the rate of increase in the Consumer Price Index to accelerate to 4 percent in the second half of 1971. The nonbank directors of the Dallas Bank indicate that their firms have raised prices by an average of 5 percent since the beginning of the year and will raise prices again before year-end. St. Louis reports that there are some expectations of accelerated price increases later this year. Several Districts report increased demand for business and mortgage loans. Mortgage rates have risen in some areas, and additional increases in mortgage rates and in the prime rate are anticipated. At Boston thrift institutions, for example, conventional mortgage rates have moved back up toward 8 percent from their April low of 7.5 percent. Kansas City also reports that, in some cases, conventional mortgage rates have ticked up a notch. More than 80 percent of the bankers polled by Richmond report an increase in demand for mortgage loans and more than 50 percent of those polled report an increase in demand for consumer and business loans. Chicago reveals that loan demand is weak but notes that loan commitment volume has increased sharply—probably an indication of expected credit stringencies. Consumer spending continues to expand, but no major surge is expected. Most of those Districts commenting on consumer spending report slight-to-moderate increases in retail sales. St. Louis indicates retail sales are up strongly, taking into account that colder-than-average weather has retarded the movement of air conditioning equipment. Minneapolis, however, reports that optimism regarding retail sales seems to have dampened slightly during the last month. A modest expansion of employment appears under way and further gradual gains are anticipated. Atlanta and Dallas report some instances of additional hiring. Philadelphia indicates that there is some step-up in hiring plans at the manufacturing level. The number of polled manufacturers who are planning to add employees is nearly four times larger than the number of manufacturers who are planning to cut back. Richmond notes that employment has been declining less than in previous periods. Dallas and St. Louis anticipate increases in employment, provided, in the St. Louis case, that the current rise in business activity continues into the fall. The consensus of the 50 economists who attended the Cleveland meeting is that there will be only a moderate expansion of real output, which will be accompanied by substantial unemployment. On steel strike possibilities, it is generally recognized that the terms incorporated in the auto, can (and now, aluminum) settlements should set the pattern for agreement. Nevertheless, local problems and militant leaders may force a strike. Plant and equipment investment is generally predicted to be weak, evidently because of excess capacity rather than high interest rates. There is also no evidence of an inventory buildup. Boston, New York, and St. Louis mention excess capacity as a deterrent to investment. Dallas, however, notes some increase in investment recently. The Atlanta Bank reports a sharp increase in inquiries received by a state Industrial Development Department. Several Districts commenting on construction report strength. San Francisco, for example, reports that housing activity continues to grow and that commercial construction, especially large shopping areas and multistory buildings, continues to be important in that District. In some other areas, however, a leveling off in construction activity is noted, rather than further increases."
1971-07-21,national,overall,"The language used in the Reserve Bank reports, to summarize the characterizations of the current economic situation by their various sources of information, falls within a rather narrow range. The present recovery is described as weak (Boston), sluggish (Cleveland), sustainable but sluggish (Philadelphia), and modest (Dallas); there is also an expression of renewed doubts about its strength (New York). Economic activity is seen as continuing a gradual improvement (Richmond), expanding at a gradual rate (San Francisco), showing moderate improvement (Kansas City), continuing moderately upward (St. Louis), improving, with the outlook modestly optimistic (Atlanta), giving rise to expectations of a moderate pickup (Dallas), and leading to the anticipation of marked gains by the year's end (Chicago). The language used in the Reserve Bank reports, to summarize the characterizations of the current economic situation by their various sources of information, falls within a rather narrow range. The present recovery is described as weak (Boston), sluggish (Cleveland), sustainable but sluggish (Philadelphia), and modest (Dallas); there is also an expression of renewed doubts about its strength (New York). Economic activity is seen as continuing a gradual improvement (Richmond), expanding at a gradual rate (San Francisco), showing moderate improvement (Kansas City), continuing moderately upward (St. Louis), improving, with the outlook modestly optimistic (Atlanta), giving rise to expectations of a moderate pickup (Dallas), and leading to the anticipation of marked gains by the year's end (Chicago). The major sources of such strength as is observed in the economy continue to be construction, especially residential construction, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, consumer spending. This statement appears to be true for nearly all Districts, although there are some differences of degree. Nearly all Banks emphasized the importance of retail sales or consumer spending in supporting the observed levels of economic activity in their Districts. However, the relative weakness of automobile sales was mentioned by three Banks-Boston, Richmond, and San Francisco-while Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis appeared relatively less bullish about retail sales and consumer spending. The tourist trade was reported to be booming in New England, strong in Florida, and off somewhat in New Jersey. Most of the Reserve Banks continue to mention the importance of strong residential construction activity, with Atlanta describing construction as the ""leading sector"" in that District's improving economic situation. Richmond notes that firms producing output related to housing and construction are doing well, and San Francisco reports production and prices up in the timber and lumber industries as a result of rising construction volume. Possible clouds on the horizon of continued construction growth are the mention of higher mortgage interest rates by several Banks, some concern over possible overbuilding of multiple-dwelling units in southern California, and a report of some softening in occupancy rates in office space and apartments in the Chicago area. Among those Banks referring to financial matters, there was fairly general agreement on the strength of consumer installment loans and real estate loans, but more limited reference to, and less agreement on, business loan demand. Richmond referred to strong demand for loans of all kinds, including business loans, while Boston described business loan demand as sluggish. San Francisco sees it as steady overall; Philadelphia, weak; and St. Louis, rising. Although lending volume has not yet strengthened in Chicago, the large banks there report having perceived the early signs of a pickup in business loan demand. Several Banks-St. Louis, Chicago, and Cleveland-reported a slowing in the rate of inflow (and some runoff) of deposits into financial institutions. Deposit inflows continue strong in the Tenth District and in the Ninth District, outside Minneapolis-St. Paul. Not all Banks commented on the employment situation in their Districts, although several did. Unemployment remains high in the Far West, with some further aerospace layoffs to come, but is described as stabilized in the Cleveland District. Steel industry production cutbacks and layoffs are posing special problems in the Chicago and Cleveland Districts, as are layoffs in automobile and ordnance plants in the Kansas City and Atlanta Districts. There was some expression of feeling that the potential steel strike would be relatively short, if it occurred at all. Two longshoremen's strikes-one now underway on the West Coast, the other a possibility to begin on October 1 along the Gulf Coast—are both feared to be lengthy and serious in their adverse effects. The demand for short-term farm loans has declined in the Ninth District as farm income flows have improved. Improved farm income is also expected in the Tenth District—drought areas aside—despite anticipated declines in farm prices. But the situation of agriculture in the Eleventh District, where the drought is centered, remains uncertain to critical over wide areas. Increased corn acreage in the Seventh District, along with the planting of some blight-resistant seed, is expected to produce a sizable corn crop and substantially lower prices for it."
1971-08-18,national,overall,"According to the Reserve banks' reports, the economic recovery still appears to be proceeding quite slowly in most districts, with the industrial sector particularly sluggish. Strikes and strike-related effects have further dampened economic activity in some districts. The slow pace of the expansion has not yet generated renewed inventory accumulation. Retail sales are rising in some districts, but are slowing in others. The brightest spot continues to be residential construction. No improvement was noted in the employment situation. Prior to the President's imposition of the wage-price freeze, the bank reports indicated no slackening in the pace of inflation. In the financial sector, all the banks reported thatbusiness loan demand was slack and that flows into consumer savings accounts had slowed noticeably. Only three banks included reports on the reactions in their districts to the President's new economic policies. Initial reactions were highly favorable.  According to the Reserve banks' reports, the economic recovery still appears to be proceeding quite slowly in most districts, with the industrial sector particularly sluggish. Strikes and strike-related effects have further dampened economic activity in some districts. The slow pace of the expansion has not yet generated renewed inventory accumulation. Retail sales are rising in some districts, but are slowing in others. The brightest spot continues to be residential construction. No improvement was noted in the employment situation. Prior to the President's imposition of the wage-price freeze, the bank reports indicated no slackening in the pace of inflation. In the financial sector, all the banks reported thatbusiness loan demand was slack and that flows into consumer savings accounts had slowed noticeably. Only three banks included reports on the reactions in their districts to the President's new economic policies. Initial reactions were highly favorable.  Durable goods manufacturing appears to be the most sluggish sector. The Boston, Richmond and Cleveland banks reported that new orders are weak in capital goods industries and backlogs are shrinking. The St. Louis bank noted that while orders are quite low for steel and durable goods manufacturers, nondurable goods producers are optimistic. A number of banks mentioned that suppliers to the construction industry were experiencing very good sales. The construction sector is reported except New York. Nonresidential building, as booming in all districts well as housing starts, was robust in a number of districts. The San Francisco bank reported that residential construction is providing the principal stimulus to the district's economy. Heavy construction activity was cited as a major reason for low unemployment in several areas within the Atlanta district. Half the banks reported that retail sales were rising in their districts. The San Francisco bank, however, noted that retail sales were only holding steady and the Atlanta bank reported that sales have moderated recently. In the New York district, retail sales varied from trendless to slowing. There does not appear to be any strengthening of inventory spending. The Richmond bank reported a substantial increase in the number of manufacturing firms decreasing inventories and that both trade and manufacturing inventories were still at higher than desired levels. Inventory cuts by industrial firms were also expected in the Cleveland district. Sluggish retail sales were cited by the San Francisco bank as restraining inventory investment. The St. Louis bank reported that steel producers expect steel inventories to be run down over the next six months, depressing their production levels. The Cleveland bank reported the beginning of coal stockpiling in anticipation of an October strike in the coal industry. Strikes and strike-related effects were depressing economic activity in several districts. Coal mining areas in the Richmond district have been hurt by the rail strike and the slowdown in the steel industry. The copper strike is reported to have affected economic activity in Maryland, Utah and Arizona. The San Francisco bank noted that the rail strikes especially hurt shipments of agricultural products, while the dock strike is affecting a widening number of industrial and agricultural producers in the twelfth district. No improvement in the employment situation was noted by any of the Reserve banks. The employment situation was described as unchanged by the Richmond, Dallas, and Chicago banks and as weak by the Minneapolis bank. The Chicago, Cleveland and New York banks reported high unemployment in steel producing areas, with layoffs continuing during early August. Continued inflation at recent rates was mentioned by a number of banks. The Atlanta and Dallas banks reported that retail prices were expected to continue increasing at recent rates. A survey of purchasing managers by the Kansas City bank (made before the President's August 15 speech) found concern about the near-term prospects for any slowing in the rate of inflation. In the Minneapolis and Cleveland districts, concern was reported over the inflationary effects of the steel settlement and announced steel price increases. The Minneapolis bank reported that a number of price and cost increases have already been instituted as a result of the steel price hikes. In the financial sector, the demand for business loans was generally reported as sluggish. The Richmond, San Francisco and Chicago banks, however, reported either good or improving demand for business loans in sections of their districts. Most banks also reported a considerable slowing in the growth of time and savings deposits. Fears of disintermediation were mentioned by the Kansas City, Chicago and Atlanta banks. Only a few banks contacted their respondents after the President's speech. Philadelphia reported that directors, bankers and businessmen in the third district, while surprised at the magnitude of the policy changes, were overwhelmingly in favor of them. Businessmen noted problems in implementing the wage-price freeze, but their general mood was one of cooperation and optimism. Initial reaction in the Chicago district among bankers and businessmen was also generally favorable. Only one bank director in the Boston district was available for comment. He was very enthusiastic about the new policies, although he noted some problems in implementation for banks. As a result of the President's speech, the Boston bank's academic respondents were generally encouraged by the prospects for breaking inflationary expectations and achieving a more stable international monetary system."
1971-09-15,national,overall,"The latest Red Book reports from the District Banks are on the whole more bullish regarding the economic outlook than the reports of recent months. The President's new economic program has been, in general, very well received throughout the country. To be sure, with the possible exception of the temporary ""freeze,"" which appears to have been almost fully accepted by all segments of the economy, the actual impact of the program on economic activity is as yet barely discernible. Consumer spending was already on the rise during the first half of August, before the announcement of the program, and it was generally felt that, apart from some marginal situations, the proposed business investment tax credit is not likely to significantly stimulate capital outlays so long as the rate of utilization of existing capacity remains low. Nevertheless, the program seems, at the very least, to have had a beneficial psychological impact, halting the erosion in confidence that had been developing in previous months. Reports of the effect of the program on domestic business firms' demand for bank credit were mixed. The latest Red Book reports from the District Banks are on the whole more bullish regarding the economic outlook than the reports of recent months. The President's new economic program has been, in general, very well received throughout the country. To be sure, with the possible exception of the temporary ""freeze,"" which appears to have been almost fully accepted by all segments of the economy, the actual impact of the program on economic activity is as yet barely discernible. Consumer spending was already on the rise during the first half of August, before the announcement of the program, and it was generally felt that, apart from some marginal situations, the proposed business investment tax credit is not likely to significantly stimulate capital outlays so long as the rate of utilization of existing capacity remains low. Nevertheless, the program seems, at the very least, to have had a beneficial psychological impact, halting the erosion in confidence that had been developing in previous months. Reports of the effect of the program on domestic business firms' demand for bank credit were mixed. A rise in consumer spending during August was reported by most District Banks. The St. Louis Bank noted a continued moderate upward movement in retail sales in most major centers of that District, with sales in Memphis rising sharply in recent days. In the Chicago District, sales of domestically produced major appliances were running above last year's level, with the margin of gain widening. A pickup in retail sales was also reported by the Richmond and New York Banks, and retailers in the latter District are looking forward to the Christmas season with optimism. Residential construction has been continuing at a high level in a number of Districts. This development is having a favorable effect on several industries. The San Francisco Bank mentioned the lumber industry in particular, while the Chicago and St. Louis Banks pointed to home furnishing and appliance manufacturers as well as building supply industries. Near-term prospects for increased business outlays for plant and equipment, however, are not regarded as particularly bright, although respondents in several Districts look for some improvement in the long run. The main deterrent to a pickup in such outlays at this time is, of course, the relatively low rate of utilization of existing facilities. The Richmond Bank, for example, reports that the overwhelming majority of manufacturers contacted believe that their current plant and equipment is adequate, or more than adequate. Most respondent firms in the St. Louis District indicate they are operating at less than capacity and have no immediate plans for plant expansion. In the New York District there are also doubts about any near-term stimulus from the proposed investment tax credit. Businessmen may, in general, be more optimistic than previously, but they seem to be adopting a ""wait-and-see"" attitude. While they are perhaps reexamining marginal investment projects more closely, they also seem to be waiting for projected sale increases to materialize. Three Districts reported some pickup in loan demand by domestic business firms that may not have been directly attributable to recent international developments. Some of the bankers contacted in a special System survey by the New York and Minneapolis Banks attributed the increase partly to inventory building. The other seven Federal Reserve Banks that reported on their survey results indicated domestic demand for business loans had remained ""weak"" or ""unchanged"". Indeed, Kansas City commented that ""the deterioration noted in July appears to have continued into late August"", and Richmond observed that not only has there been ""no evidence of unusual strength in business loan demand"" but ""pressure for business loan commitments appears to have abated"" since the wage-price freeze. Four Districts commented on bankers' expectations regarding business loan demands over the next few months, noting that these expectations were generally on the ""hopeful"" side. Interestingly, two of these Districts, Philadelphia and Minneapolis, were among those reporting some recent strengthening. The other two were St. Louis and Dallas."
1971-10-13,national,overall,"Judging from the District reports, the effect of the new economic program thus far has been to improve the economic outlook. Spending and production, as yet apparently largely unaffected by the new program, continue a moderate expansion. Strength in consumer spending is expected to continue. There is no sign of a marked change in capital spending plans. The loan demand outlook is mixed. There are some expectations of interest rate declines. Judging from the District reports, the effect of the new economic program thus far has been to improve the economic outlook. Spending and production, as yet apparently largely unaffected by the new program, continue a moderate expansion. Strength in consumer spending is expected to continue. There is no sign of a marked change in capital spending plans. The loan demand outlook is mixed. There are some expectations of interest rate declines. Several banks report that optimism generated by the announcement of the new economic program continues. However, the St. Louis Bank indicates that the original enthusiasm for the program has moderated, and the Philadelphia Bank reports that earlier optimism seems to have dissipated. Kansas City reports that some merchants think the program may be adversely affecting consumer spending. Chicago reports that the program may have resulted in an ""air of uncertainty"" that conceivably could delay the economic recovery. The Philadelphia and Chicago Banks report skepticism about the efficacy of Phase II, and one of Boston's academic respondents thinks the control structure is awkward. Chicago indicates that some small firms appear to believe they can evade the controls with impunity and that large firms have almost cut off publicity on price developments. There is some doubt about the effect of the program on prices and price expectations. The Chicago Bank reports the freeze may have aided the disposal of 1971 model automobiles at better-than-expected prices and that popular 1972 models are being loaded with high-profit extras. Philadelphia reports a rise this month in the percentage of manufacturers predicting an overall increase in prices. Dallas reports that economists interviewed indicate little hope for a reduction in the rate of inflation. A Boston director does not feel that the size of a recent wage settlement was affected by the freeze, except that the freeze delayed the negotiated wage increase. The New York Bank reports excellent compliance with the freeze, yet one of the Bank's directors warns of a ""head of steam"" building under wage demands. Retail sales were most often described as strong or improving. Robust auto sales were commonly cited. Two banks report a bunching of purchases to beat post-freeze price increases. Two banks also mention that furniture sales are improving; in one case, the improvement was associated with the surge in residential construction. Several banks mention that no early uptrend in capital spending is anticipated and that inventory plans remain cautious. However, an increase in plant location inquiries is detected by St. Louis. Also, Chicago reports an increase in design-stage activity for some types of long-lead time machinery. Capital goods producers in the Boston District report improved prospects. An academic respondent in the Boston District sees a danger that political pressure to lower short-term interest rates could result in a flood of liquidity that, in conjunction with liberalized depreciation and the investment tax credit, could trigger an excessive capital spending boom in the first quarter of 1973. Manufacturers in the Richmond District report further increases in shipments, orders, and backlogs. Cleveland also mentioned an increase in new orders and reported that steel companies experienced an improvement in new orders in September, although orders were well below normal. Steel inventory liquidation is expected to continue into December. Philadelphia reports that manufacturers are less optimistic with respect to new orders, shipments, and unfilled orders. Loan behavior and loan demand outlook are mixed. Several banks note moderate to strong demand for consumer and mortgage loans. On the other hand, three banks report expectations of weak loan demand accompanied by declines in interest rates. Strength in construction was reported by several Districts, but San Francisco indicated concern over rising vacancy rates in multi-family units and Chicago indicates an excess supply of space in new office buildings. An oversupply of office space and apartments may also slow the growth of construction in the Atlanta area."
1971-11-10,national,overall,"The economic picture presented by the Red Book reports is that the price freeze is working, but that uncertainties concerning Phase II are hampering business planning. Consumers are spending more freely, especially on durables, but demand for most producer goods remains very sluggish, and inventory investment policies are cautious. Employment in most districts does not appear to be improving significantly. Credit is generally available in all leading categories, and interest rates are lower. Two banks (Chicago and San Francisco) report recent evidence that the housing boom has lost momentum. The economic picture presented by the Red Book reports is that the price freeze is working, but that uncertainties concerning Phase II are hampering business planning. Consumers are spending more freely, especially on durables, but demand for most producer goods remains very sluggish, and inventory investment policies are cautious. Employment in most districts does not appear to be improving significantly. Credit is generally available in all leading categories, and interest rates are lower. Two banks (Chicago and San Francisco) report recent evidence that the housing boom has lost momentum. Most reports indicate that a gradual improvement in general activity is under way that will probably accelerate in 1972. But there are notable exceptions. Richmond reports a ""substantial reduction in the pace of shipments and orders, reflecting, in part, the coal and dock strikes. Cleveland finds the coal strike a depressing influence. New York finds that ""optimism (is) significantly more subdued."" St. Louis states that ""activity has tended to level off."" A Boston academician warns of a ""downward spiral."" Cleveland, on the other hand, reports general improvement, and, uniquely, finds evidence of a substantial rise in capital outlays. Lack of conviction as to prospects for future prosperity was characterized in a variety of clichs of limited descriptive power—e.g., ""cautious optimism,"" ""wait and see attitudes,"" and ""waiting for the other shoe to drop."" Business firms are cautious on inventories (Kansas City) hirings (Dallas and Philadelphia), and expansion of short-term debt (several banks). Atlanta tells of cotton textiles producers not accepting orders because of higher cotton prices, and other specific problems are cited in connection with the freeze. Uncertainty over Phase II is not simply a matter of a desire for action by Congress and the new regulatory bodies. Businessmen worry that prices may be controlled more effectively than wages. Lenders are concerned that if interest rates decline further, increases in rates will not be allowed when loan demand strengthens. Several banks found that purchasers of capital equipment do not view the investment tax credit as a significant stimulus to capital spending under current conditions. Requirements of utilities for new facilities remain large and will not be deterred by the factors affecting other sectors. Boston reports that some firms are reducing capital outlay budgets. The surge in auto sales, apparently, is universal. Some banks, including Chicago, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, also emphasized strong demand for household durables, especially furniture. Increased consumer purchases, however, have not significantly reduced the rate of rise in liquid assets. The trade balance may be improving because of pertinent aspects of the NEP. Boston sees evidence of a ""Buy American"" spirit. Atlanta reports foreign firms have ""increased inquiries about plant sites and joint ventures. Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco report large agricultural crops of good quality. Crop price declines, while resulting in reduced income for crop farmers, are helping to boost meat production. In the financial area, all banks report credit readily available, and generally at lower interest rates. At commercial banks, demands for consumer installment loans and mortgage credit are strong, but demand for business loans is still slow."
1971-12-08,national,overall,"The general tenor of the twelve Red Book reports may he summed up as follows: a present business situation that is generating little enthusiasm; an emphasis on uncertainty, perhaps even greater than usual; and a future viewed with some optimism. This generalization alone of course conceals a range of views, especially for the present situation: ""sluggish"" conditions are reported from Philadelphia and Cleveland, while Boston and Dallas report ""good"" or improving"" conditions, and some Atlanta District businessmen suggest that pessimism has been exaggerated."" The consensus is greater, however, on the existence and retarding influence of uncertainty—more than a little of which emerges from the presently unknown influence of Phase II policies and their implementation. Yet, expressions of optimism for the months ahead are found throughout the various Bank reports. The general tenor of the twelve Red Book reports may he summed up as follows: a present business situation that is generating little enthusiasm; an emphasis on uncertainty, perhaps even greater than usual; and a future viewed with some optimism. This generalization alone of course conceals a range of views, especially for the present situation: ""sluggish"" conditions are reported from Philadelphia and Cleveland, while Boston and Dallas report ""good"" or improving"" conditions, and some Atlanta District businessmen suggest that pessimism has been exaggerated."" The consensus is greater, however, on the existence and retarding influence of uncertainty—more than a little of which emerges from the presently unknown influence of Phase II policies and their implementation. Yet, expressions of optimism for the months ahead are found throughout the various Bank reports. As might be expected in a period of uncertainty and adjustment to new policies, considerable variations of opinion were gathered by the Reserve Banks from respondents to their inquiries. In construction, for example, the Richmond Bank reports some slackening in both residential and nonresidential building; in Chicago, residential vacancy rates are up and new permit issuance has slowed down; and construction activity has tended to level off recently in St. Louis. On the other hand, continued strength in construction is reported from Atlanta, Kansas City, and San Francisco. Several Banks found mortgage money abundant, and rates and terms easing. Saving and loan savings inflows remain strong, and life insurance companiesalso reportedly have ample funds and are in search of investment opportunities. Consumer spending, past and expected, also varies considerably from District to District. On balance, there does not seem to be great strength in this sector. Retailers contacted by the New York Bank expect a ""good, if not spectacular, holiday season,"" an attitude shared to a greater or lesser extent by merchants in the Kansas City, Dallas, Minneapolis, and San Francisco districts. Prospects might be thought a little brighter in the Richmond and St. Louis areas; a little dimmer in the Philadelphia area. Those Banks remarking on inventory investment nearly all cast some doubt on a sudden rise in the rate of inventory accumulation. The New York Bank's respondents see no significant pickup in business inventory spending, a view seconded in the Boston report. In the Dallas District, where sales have been slow recently, retail inventories are described as ""excessive,"" and St. Louis reports that retail inventories there are not growing with sales. In the San Francisco District, inventories are being ""deliberately kept low and geared to sales,"" while Chicago states that ""Inventories continue under tight control."" In a somewhat different view, the Richmond Bank notes some recent slight increases in manufacturers' inventories, but finds retail inventories declining to more desired levels. The steel industry's position was commented on specifically in the Chicago and Cleveland reports. Steel orders—""disappointing"" overall, but variable from firm to firm and plant to plant—appear to be in for gradual improvement, bringing operations back to ""normal"" next year for the entire industry. In the meantime, the steel industry is ""depressed"" as the inventory liquidation is prolonged by increased imports and lower-than-expected current consumption of steel. While the steel situation has combined with several strikes to bring recent employment declines in the Cleveland District, employment growth is lagging in other Districts, too. Philadelphia reports little new manufacturing employment, a condition expected to extend into the immediate future. Some slight improvement in employment in scattered areas of the New York District is apparently bringing little improvement in overall unemployment. Employers in the Boston District note that, with capacity use rates so low, a sizable rise in demand will be needed before employment is expanded. Yet, improving employment situations are reported in the Atlanta, Dallas, and Richmond districts. The relatively few comments on business capital spending indicate no current spurt in such activity. However, there has been some increase in purchases of heavy trucks, construction and materials handling equipment, and especially of farm machinery. Both the Minneapolis and Kansas City Banks commented that the investment tax credit might be partly responsible for the latter, along with the harvesting of bumper crops and rising farm income. Agribusiness firms generally are quite optimistic about their future sales prospects. There was agreement on the Atlantic and Pacific Coasts on the frailty of business loan demand and its relationship to the moderate pace of economic activity. The New York Bank noted that ""the demand for business loans does not suggest any quickening in the pace of business activity,"" and the San Francisco Bank commented as follows: "".... with few exceptions, bankers describe business loan demand as weak, reflecting the moderate pace of business spending."" Business loan demand was only ""seasonal"" in the Philadelphia area; ""slow, and weaker than usual"" in the Chicago District; and weak at major banks in the Eighth District. In the Kansas City District, however, business loans were stronger in November than in other recent months. The range of feelings expressed about Phase II include uncertainty, skepticism, and optimism. Several businessmen in the St. Louis District feel that the new programs have hindered business spending so far, and some ""see little hope for improvement in prices and profits."" Some respondents in the Chicago District feel that sufficient price rises will not be allowed to keep up with cost increases. A major fear, expressed in the New York report and implied in the reports from San Francisco and Chicago, is that controls on prices will be more effective than those on wages, and that a profit squeeze will result, especially for large companies. While not overly optimistic about the program's complete success, there was an attitude that its influence would be favorable—""better than nothing,"" with ""a 50-50 per cent chance of 'crudely and clumsily' moderating the pace of inflation,"" according to one director of the New York Bank. As the San Francisco Bank aptly concluded: ""Overall, Phase II was greeted with less enthusiasm than Phase I, because its duration and character are more difficult to assess."""
1972-02-09,national,overall,"Moderate recovery, based mainly on strength in residential construction and some consumer outlays, continues to epitomize the course of the economy. Optimism prevails despite widespread slack in employment and business loan demand. The range of response from Reserve Banks is small. At best, the economy is expanding ""on a broad front"" and ""at a steady pace."" Superlatives were confined mainly to demand for consumer household durables, heavy trucks and building materials. At worse, there are ""some signs of recovery,"" though the upturn ""can barely be perceived"" in the eyes of some. Moderate recovery, based mainly on strength in residential construction and some consumer outlays, continues to epitomize the course of the economy. Optimism prevails despite widespread slack in employment and business loan demand. The range of response from Reserve Banks is small. At best, the economy is expanding ""on a broad front"" and ""at a steady pace."" Superlatives were confined mainly to demand for consumer household durables, heavy trucks and building materials. At worse, there are ""some signs of recovery,"" though the upturn ""can barely be perceived"" in the eyes of some. Phase II has been generally accepted"" and has been regarded as helpful so far in aiding competitive forces to limit price increases. Some criticisms have developed, however, which may menace its future. Numerous declines in interest rates, particularly on mortgages and consumer deposit accounts, are reported. Savings flows have held up well. While some concern was expressed over the size of the Federal deficit, most were centered on the fear that large deficits will become a fiscal ""way of life,"" which could not be abandoned as the economy approaches full employment. Anticipated business investment remains very strong, though the concrete signs that have already emerged are mixed. In a survey of the corporate treasurers of Fortune's 650 nonfinancial firms, the Philadelphia bank found planned spending on plant and equipment will increase by 10 percent in 1972. That bank, along with Atlanta and Chicago, found numerous incidents of plant expansions and new plants. Neither New York, Cleveland, St. Louis, San Francisco, or Boston, however, found signs of a surge in capital spending. While the high level of unused capacity is typically cited as the cause, St. Louis found sluggish capital expenditures among some firms experiencing higher operating to capacity ratios. Although a majority of firms reporting to the New York bank anticipated higher inventory outlays, Kansas City encountered ""further inventory reductions, and no inventory buildup-sometimes in spite of increased sales expectations."" Neither Richmond nor Boston reported systematic inventory replenishment. There was a pickup in the pace of manufacturing orders, shipments, and backlogs in the Philadelphia, Atlanta, Richmond, and Chicago Districts. Steel companies in the Cleveland District expect first quarter shipments to outstrip last quarter's by 25 percent. Steel orders have picked up in recent weeks in Cleveland, and in Chicago they show the broadly based gain which had been expected. Most of the increases in employment were recorded in the East. Philadelphia found that 10 percent of manufacturing firms surveyed had increased employment and 17 percent had increased average hours. Richmond noted shortages of skilled and unskilled labor. Scattered gains also occurred in upstate New York and in the Cleveland and Atlanta Districts. Elsewhere the employment picture remained bleak, either stagnating or deteriorating. Little improvement was the story in Boston, St. Louis, and most of New York, while some layoffs appeared in Dallas, Cleveland, and Minneapolis. Continued strength in construction, primarily residential construction, and heavy output of lumber and wood products were both mentioned often. Financing proved not to be a problem, as savings flows were reported to have held high or even accelerated, while mortgage rates have either fallen, as in Richmond and Minneapolis, or downward pressure has developed, as in St. Louis. Some demand problems, resulting from overbuilding, have popped up for apartments, in Atlanta and in the Twin Cities, and in retail selling and office space, in Atlanta and in the Chicago loop district. A fear of competition from savings and loan associations has kept commercial banks in the Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Cleveland Districts from cutting rates paid on consumer time deposits. Several banks have indicated to the Cleveland bank ""that a further reduction in the prime rate would probably force them to cut their deposit rates, regardless of whether other institutions followed. Most banks maintained that they could not successfully cut deposit rates unless they were convinced that savings and loans would follow, but they see no reason to expect savings and loans to reduce deposit rates as long as mortgage rates remain at current levels."" Variations abound in the sales performance of consumers' goods. Good gains in general retail sales materialized in San Francisco and in Richmond. Demand was vigorous for consumer household durables in Chicago, and new orders were encouraging in Boston. Strong durable goods sales in Minneapolis accompanied only modest increases in the sale of nondurables. Mixed patterns were also experienced in St. Louis, where services were strong and department store sales were weak, and in Dallas, where department store sales were up and new automobile registrations were down. Kansas City and Richmond reported buoyancy in consumer loan demand, but they, along with Philadelphia, Chicago, Boston, and San Francisco, continued to report weak business loan demand. The three academic respondents contacted by Boston agreed that an expansive policy should be continued until additional signs of strength appear."
1972-03-15,national,overall,"The overall impression that emerges from the individual District Red Book reports is one of continuing improvement in the economic outlook. Consumer spending is apparently on the rise, with indications of heightened interest in nonessential or postponable goods and in both big ticket and higher priced items. New orders, shipments and backlogs of industrial goods are reportedly strengthening, while business confidence is improving noticeably. These favorable developments, however, have not as yet been translated into a significant turnaround in the cautious inventory policies of businesses, and are still reflected only to a moderate extent in actual or planned increases in outlays for plant and equipment. Similarly, the increase in sales and production has not as yet found its counterpart in a sharp rise in the demand for labor, although it has reportedly led to a limited improvement in the unemployment picture. The overall impression that emerges from the individual District Red Book reports is one of continuing improvement in the economic outlook. Consumer spending is apparently on the rise, with indications of heightened interest in nonessential or postponable goods and in both big ticket and higher priced items. New orders, shipments and backlogs of industrial goods are reportedly strengthening, while business confidence is improving noticeably. These favorable developments, however, have not as yet been translated into a significant turnaround in the cautious inventory policies of businesses, and are still reflected only to a moderate extent in actual or planned increases in outlays for plant and equipment. Similarly, the increase in sales and production has not as yet found its counterpart in a sharp rise in the demand for labor, although it has reportedly led to a limited improvement in the unemployment picture. With respect to consumer spending for goods and services, evidence of strengthening of consumer confidence can be discerned in reports to the New York Bank of increased purchases of nonessential goods and of big ticket items, and the fact that sales of durables are much more vigorous than those of nondurable goods in the Chicago area, with recreational vehicles such as motorcycles, golf carts, snowmobiles and similar items leading the field. In addition, several banks report a sharp uptrend in passenger airline traffic and Atlanta reports booming tourist business in Florida. And while sentiments were mixed in the Philadelphia District, retailers are expecting sales of home furnishings to be strong as a result of the high level of housing completions in the area. A note of caution, however, was sounded by some San Francisco bank respondents who questioned whether consumer spending would become much stronger. Concerning construction outlays, most District reports referring to activities in that industry and/or related industries, indicated that residential, and in some cases (Atlanta) nonresidential construction, continues to be a strong element in the current economic recovery. Some banks, however, including San Francisco, Chicago and Boston, report some feeling among their respondents that a leveling-off in the industry is probably in the offing. As for industrial activity manufacturers participating in the Philadelphia monthly Business Outlook Survey report a further pickup in new orders and shipments in February, which is expected to accelerate in March, while Chicago manufacturers of TV sets, furniture and home appliances are said to be very pleased with the trend of sales. Increases in varying degrees in orders, shipments and backlogs-often linked either to a rise in consumer demand or to strong construction activity-are also mentioned by several other Banks, including Richmond and St. Louis. The Dallas Bank notes that the Texas industrial production interest rose to a record level in January. Despite the apparent strengthening of the economic recovery, District reports, however, generally note that businessmen are still maintaining cautious inventory policies at this juncture, and that no significant turnaround in such policies is indicated for the near future. The current inventory picture is well summed up by the results of the latest Minneapolis Industrial Expectations Survey, which indicate that nearly three quarters of the responding manufacturers considered their inventory positions to be satisfactory, with the balance equally divided between those who considered their inventories too high or too low. Similar sentiments were expressed by several other banks, although Chicago reported that an increasing number of firms showed concern over the adequacy of their inventories to meet rising demands. Concerning business outlays for plant and equipment, Philadelphia reports that an increasing number of area manufacturers are planning to boost capital outlays, with firms contacted that planned increases outnumbering those planning cut-backs 10 to 1. Atlanta reports that previously postponed capital improvements at airports and other nonresidential projects will now be implemented. Cleveland notes that truck production and sales were at record levels, while both the Chicago and New York Banks saw evidence of a sharp rise in agricultural capital spending. On the other hand, St. Louis notes that capital expenditures are being delayed as long as possible, as its business respondents express reluctance to make major investments in view of the uncertainties surrounding profit prospects, and San Francisco reports a conservative attitude by local businessmen toward new capital investment. Regarding the unemployment picture, reports vary among the District banks, but on balance suggest some limited improvement. Richmond thus reports sharp increases in manufacturing employment, as well as a substantial rise in the trade and services industries. The Philadelphia and New York Banks both had evidence that some firms were adding to their payrolls, while the Dallas Bank indicated that a rise in employment, notably in the construction industry, had lowered the jobless rate in the District to its lowest level in more than a year. According to reports to the Atlanta Bank, unemployment was "" low"" in East Tennessee, and scattered improvement was seen elsewhere in that District. There has also been some increase in employment in the lumber industry in the San Francisco District. The Cleveland Bank notes a continued small recovery into January in non-farm employment, but expects no major improvement at this time. Similarly, Chicago notes that employers have been very cautious in increasing their work force, and St. Louis reports that apart from some gains in the construction and service trades, additions to payrolls are being delayed."
1972-04-12,national,overall,"On the whole, District banks report that the general business climate continues to improve. Industrial activity is increasing in most Districts, but gains on the employment front are less widespread. The retail sector shows signs of improvement in several Districts both for general items and automobiles. Capital spending plans have been stepped up in some Districts, but caution remains among businessmen in other areas. Construction, however, continues to be a strong sector in most of the regional economies. Loan demand at commercial banks, in general, shows increasing strength. Concern about inflation appears in several reports, but there is some evidence that food prices are stabilizing. On the whole, District banks report that the general business climate continues to improve. Industrial activity is increasing in most Districts, but gains on the employment front are less widespread. The retail sector shows signs of improvement in several Districts both for general items and automobiles. Capital spending plans have been stepped up in some Districts, but caution remains among businessmen in other areas. Construction, however, continues to be a strong sector in most of the regional economies. Loan demand at commercial banks, in general, shows increasing strength. Concern about inflation appears in several reports, but there is some evidence that food prices are stabilizing. Industrial activity is on the upswing in most Districts. Richmond, Cleveland, Boston, and Philadelphia report continued increases in new orders and shipments at manufacturing firms. Other Districts also report gains, with business sentiment stabilized on a moderately optimistic level. Chicago notes particular strength in the steel industry while St. Louis reports improvement in steel and the consumer goods sector. Dallas attributes increases in industrial production in its District to an especially large boost in mining activity. However, improving trends in business activity have yet to register a nationwide impact on employment. District reports remain mixed. Richmond, Philadelphia, and Boston find firms adding workers to their payrolls. Richmond also reports increases in hours worked per week. Other Districts (Cleveland, St. Louis, and Dallas) report little change in their overall employment picture. Chicago notes that layoffs have become fewer in recent months and many firms are hiring again after a long drought. Minneapolis expects employment growth to improve but not significantly in the second quarter. The retail sector shows signs of improvement in several Districts. Richmond reports continuing strong sales, both in general retail items and in automobiles. Dallas cites sizeable gains in department store sales and new car registrations. San Francisco finds durables doing better than average and autos continuing steady. Other Districts (New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Minneapolis) report only moderate improvement but more optimistic forecasts for future months. Although capital spending plans have increased in some Districts, an aura of caution remains among businessmen elsewhere. Boston reports that expenditure plans range from unchanged to a 10 to 15 per cent increase over last year. Chicago also cites an improved investment outlook with orders for capital goods rising in recent months. St. Louis, however, finds investment remaining sluggish. Profits at area firms, although up, are not sufficient to merit additional capital outlays. San Francisco reports that business investment plans remain cautious with no major revision of expectations apparent. Construction remains a bright spot in many of the regional economies. Kansas City reports housing starts are considerably ahead of last year and are expected to continue strong. Nonresidential construction is also expected to improve. Richmond, likewise, reports increases in both residential and nonresidential construction. New York reports continued strength but forecasts a possible flattening out in activity. Atlanta finds a near boom in construction in Florida. Other Districts (Cleveland, St. Louis, and Dallas), although reporting a leveling off or even a moderate decline, still show construction at high levels of activity. Loan demand at commercial banks shows increasing strength. Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Dallas report signs of improvement in demand conditions for business loans. New York and Chicago report more sluggish activity and regard alternative sources of funds for business as a prime reason for a slack in loan demand, both now and in the near future. Boston, Richmond, Kansas City, and San Francisco report strong mortgage demand. Richmond, Kansas City, and San Francisco also see increases in consumer installment loans. Those District Banks reporting on the price situation generally express some reason for concern. Richmond, although noting few changes in prices received by trade and service or manufacturing concerns, reports increases in wages paid by these firms. Chicago reports upward pressure on a wide variety of raw materials. Boston cites many areas in which price increases have become common and, in some cases, quite large. Businessmen in the Boston area convey a growing disillusionment on the effectiveness of Phase II. This sentiment is also reported in the Minneapolis District. New York businessmen, although recognizing that Phase II is not fully adequate, nevertheless feel it is having a favorable impact on current developments. In the agriculture sector, conditions appear to be improving. Farm income is up and crop production is normal or better. Spot checks by Kansas City at retail food chains reveal greater price stability than a month ago. Wholesale meat prices are expected to decline in the near term but retail prices less so. Dallas finds livestock conditions better than a year ago, with the number of cattle on feed up substantially. San Francisco reports cattle prices holding steady."
1972-05-17,national,overall,"Overall, District reports reveal continued economic expansion in most sectors of the economy, although there are indications of slowing in certain activities. In the forefront, there is continued concern about inflation, the wage-price controls, and the performance of profits. Consumer sentiment and spending appear to be gathering strength in many areas, as is capital spending. Residential construction, however, is showing some signs of weakening. On balance, businessmen are still cautious with regard to inventory investment. Employment is generally rising, unemployment remains a problem. Current and prospective agricultural conditions are excellent in most parts of the nation. The major categories of bank loans are improving. Overall, District reports reveal continued economic expansion in most sectors of the economy, although there are indications of slowing in certain activities. In the forefront, there is continued concern about inflation, the wage-price controls, and the performance of profits. Consumer sentiment and spending appear to be gathering strength in many areas, as is capital spending. Residential construction, however, is showing some signs of weakening. On balance, businessmen are still cautious with regard to inventory investment. Employment is generally rising, unemployment remains a problem. Current and prospective agricultural conditions are excellent in most parts of the nation. The major categories of bank loans are improving. Boston reports concern among businessmen about inflation and about the ability of the price and pay boards to achieve their goals. Economists attending a regular outlook session at the Cleveland Bank expressed the view that further progress in reducing the rate of inflation will be difficult to achieve, and they think it unlikely that inflation can be held below 3.5 percent for any sustained period over the next year or so. Chicago reports there is widespread irritation among businessmen over recent actions of the price commission. Atlanta, on the other hand, mentions that there have been few reports of inflationary psychology, despite tight labor markets in their area. Districts ""taking the pulse"" of the manufacturing sector report further gains in new orders and shipments, coupled with improvement in employment and the workweek. Richmond and Cleveland, however, detect a recent slowdown in steel orders. Chicago reports the demand for certain types of capital goods is up sharply, primarily for modernization rather than for expansion. Sales of heavy trucks in particular are expected to remain vigorous through mid-1973. Businessmen in St. Louis also say their capital spending is largely for modernization and equipment, noting that profit margins are still too low to provide incentive for major plant expansion. Chicago and Minneapolis both mention extremely good sales of farm machinery and equipment. Respondents in New York and Cleveland raise questions about accepting too readily the strength implied by recent plant and equipment surveys, at least until more evidence is available. San Francisco mentions some caution in business spending plans. Recent consumer spending patterns are difficult to interpret, in part because the early Easter season may have distorted March and April retail sales data. New York, Minneapolis, and Kansas City report gathering strength in consumer sales. Chicago and Atlanta emphasize strong sales of consumer recreational goods. On the other hand, Cleveland mentions a recent weakening of GAF retail sales; St. Louis reports a leveling in department store sales; Dallas sees some signs of weakening in nonautomotive retail trade; and Richmond says retailers in the Baltimore area were disappointed with sales in April and early May. Construction generally remains strong in most Districts, especially in Atlanta. Cleveland, however, reports a sharp drop in residential construction. Minneapolis mentions that rising vacancy rates in the Twin Cities are causing banks to be more cautious in their lending policies. San Francisco notes that the high level of apartment and commercial building in Southern California is raising concern over vacancy rates and causing banks to be more cautious in extending credit. Districts commenting on agricultural conditions (St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco) report highly favorable prospects for crops and livestock. Chicago mentioned that recent wet weather delayed corn planting. Districts commenting on bank loans report moderate to strong increases in loan demand, except Boston, where business loans are weak."
1972-06-14,national,overall,"Reports from the twelve districts indicate continued strengthening in business activity and greater optimism in general. Consumer spending, which has continued strong in most regions, seems to be the main source of strength. Greater output in industries closely related to the provision of final goods, especially durables, was cited as principal source of expanding manufacturing employment and increased business loan demand. Inventories have, for the most part, remained unchanged. Construction of single-family dwellings has continued to boost overall activity. Loan demand at commercial banks has increased, with consumer and business loan categories up most sharply. In general, wage and price increases have been moderate. Reports from the twelve districts indicate continued strengthening in business activity and greater optimism in general. Consumer spending, which has continued strong in most regions, seems to be the main source of strength. Greater output in industries closely related to the provision of final goods, especially durables, was cited as principal source of expanding manufacturing employment and increased business loan demand. Inventories have, for the most part, remained unchanged. Construction of single-family dwellings has continued to boost overall activity. Loan demand at commercial banks has increased, with consumer and business loan categories up most sharply. In general, wage and price increases have been moderate. Most districts reported encouraging strength in sales of consumer goods. Part of the gain in consumer purchases was attributed by Atlanta, Richmond and Chicago to stronger auto sales; Dallas, however, reported a decline in auto registrations. Major household items and other consumer durables were strong in some districts. Kansas City, Boston and Chicago specifically mentioned recreational items. While retail sales rose in the St. Louis district, the advance was not as great as anticipated by retailers. Slowness characterized retail sales in the New York district, where the outlook was less bright than a month ago. Steel production was reported favorable in the Chicago and Cleveland districts. The output levels are considerably different, however, for the various steel industry products. Production of steel sheets for use in autos and appliances has displayed the most strength in both districts, while demand for steel used in commercial and industrial construction has remained relatively weak. Manufacturing activity was reported to be increasing in five districts. Sales of both durables and nondurables advanced in Minneapolis and capital goods orders were strong in Boston. Dallas reported gains in industrial production in April with broad-based strength across industry lines. Manufacturers that supply national markets are reportedly optimistic in the St. Louis district. St. Louis, and Chicago as well, mentioned benefits to manufacturers resulting from reduced foreign competition. Richmond reported strength in district industries. Most districts reported little change in inventory accumulation. Several reserve banks reported significant employment gains in their respective districts. Philadelphia indicated over 15 percent of the firms responding to a survey added to their payrolls and nearly 5 percent lengthened their average workweek. In the Chicago district, there was an increase in the number of firms adding workers or stretching workweeks, but two major-city governments are still very concerned about unemployment. While Dallas and Boston reported no significant labor market changes, Minneapolis indicated the Ninth District's unemployment rate rose from 5.7 percent in March to 5.9 percent in April. Construction activity has remained strong in most districts. San Francisco reported that national construction activity gains have aided recovery of the Pacific Northwest because of the greater demand for lumber and wood products. Generally, residential construction has been strong in the nation, but Atlanta reported it appeared to be slowing. Commercial construction has slackened and concern has been expressed for possible overbuilding of multiunit dwellings in the San Francisco and Kansas City districts. Of all the districts, only Atlanta reported anticipation of a surge in commercial construction. Loan demand in general, and business loan demand in particular, were noted as being quite strong by most districts. Exceptions included New York, where an increase in total loans was not accounted for by commercial and industrial loans, and Kansas City, where business loan demand has also been weak. Richmond and Dallas reported strength in consumer loans, while Philadelphia and Kansas City reported moderate gains in consumer lending. Housing and construction credit were noted as sources of strength in the Dallas and St. Louis districts while in the Philadelphia district future strength in construction lending is anticipated. Four districts reported continuing strong inflows of savings deposits. One of the four, Kansas City, noted inflows were above year-ago levels but slower than earlier in 1972. St. Louis, Boston and Chicago also mentioned strong savings inflows. Most districts cited the importance of the Price Commission's role in slowing the rate of inflation. The Minneapolis and San Francisco reserve banks indicated prices and wages were growing at reduced rates, and retail establishments in the Kansas City district have reported no sharp run-ups in suppliers' prices. In the Boston district, suppliers' prices have generally been rising gradually and one director indicated the pace was faster in the second quarter than in the first. In the Philadelphia district, despite expectations of no change in prices paid, 20 percent of the manufacturing firms which responded to a survey were anticipating establishing price increases on their own products in June. Only 7 percent reported price increases in May. Weather and cattle prices were emphasized in reports on the agricultural outlook. Weather conditions throughout much of the Midwest reportedly had adverse effects on plantings. Excessive rainfall in parts of the Minneapolis and St. Louis districts have retarded crop developments and in the case of Minneapolis caused some switching from corn plantings to grain sorghums and soybeans. Drought conditions have developed in the Atlanta district and the northern part of the St. Louis district. Higher beef prices were noted by the Chicago, Richmond and Kansas City banks, and the St. Louis bank reported strong sales of farm equipment."
1972-07-18,national,overall,"Reports from the twelve Districts indicate that economic activity continues to strengthen and the outlook of most businessmen and bankers is optimistic. Consumer spending, especially for tourism, recreational vehicles, and autos, appears to be a major source of strength. Capital spending and plans for future outlays still appear to be gathering momentum, and orders and shipments of heavy capital goods producers are reported to be on the upswing. While construction activity is at a high level, signs of some slowdown in construction are becoming apparent in several Districts. Inventories are still being held closely in check with most manufacturing and trade firms reporting no change or only a modest increase in inventories. In general, agricultural conditions are good to excellent. However, heavy rains in some areas have set back crop conditions. Loan demand is on the increase, but banks apparently have adequate funds to meet the expected near-term loan demand. Interest rates on most loans are reported to be little changed or slightly higher in the last month. Reports from the twelve Districts indicate that economic activity continues to strengthen and the outlook of most businessmen and bankers is optimistic. Consumer spending, especially for tourism, recreational vehicles, and autos, appears to be a major source of strength. Capital spending and plans for future outlays still appear to be gathering momentum, and orders and shipments of heavy capital goods producers are reported to be on the upswing. While construction activity is at a high level, signs of some slowdown in construction are becoming apparent in several Districts. Inventories are still being held closely in check with most manufacturing and trade firms reporting no change or only a modest increase in inventories. In general, agricultural conditions are good to excellent. However, heavy rains in some areas have set back crop conditions. Loan demand is on the increase, but banks apparently have adequate funds to meet the expected near-term loan demand. Interest rates on most loans are reported to be little changed or slightly higher in the last month. Optimism on the part of businessmen and bankers is evident in most of the District reports this month. Atlanta notes that descriptions of the economy generally run from good to booming. Richmond reports that their directors are optimistic, and Kansas City notes that businessmen seem ""unguardedly optimistic"" about the economic outlook. And the consensus at Chicago's annual Business Outlook Conference was that the current economic expansion would last at least through the first half of 1973. New York directors were characterized as mixed on the economic outlook but were more optimistic than in the previous month. Strength in the demand for consumer goods was noted in most regions. Minneapolis reports yearly sales gains of 5 to 10 percent in the Twin Cities area in the second quarter and a strong demand for meat at the retail level. Retail firms in New York were more optimistic this month about consumer confidence and outlays; consumer spending on nondurables appeared to be good in the Boston District. Brisk auto sales were cited by Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco while Chicago reported an optimistic forecast for autos in both 1972 and 1973 at their Business Outlook Conference. Cleveland, however, reported that car sales in that District had risen less than in the nation. And St. Louis noted a decline in retail sales at major department stores in June, following a strong uptrend earlier in the year. Although the recent heavy rains depressed retail sales in the Philadelphia District, retail executives there are optimistic about sales this fall. Improved consumer demand is also indicated by increased spending for recreational activities. The Boston, Chicago, and San Francisco Districts all report booming sales of recreational type vehicles. Atlanta reports heavy attendance at Florida's Disney World, with the benefits of this visitor attraction apparently spilling over to other parts of the Southeast. Businesses catering to vacationers in the Kansas City District were doing very well although tourists were reported to be avoiding luxury items. Plans for increased capital spending were noted by St. Louis and Chicago as a source of further economic strength. And announcements of new plants and plant expansions continue to be numerous in the Atlanta District. However, the percentage of firms reporting increased capital spending plans in Philadelphia's regular survey has stabilized at about 45 percent in the past two months. The upturn in capital spending this year is beginning to have a noticeable impact on the sales of some heavy goods manufacturers. Chicago cited increased sales of heavy construction equipment and over-the-road trailers while Boston reported an increase in orders for oil field equipment and aircraft parts. Steel companies in the Cleveland District are experiencing a strong and steady order pace with the prospect of some pickup in orders from the auto industry for August deliveries. Inventory levels are generally unchanged or only increasing moderately. Manufacturing respondents to the monthly Richmond survey reported little change in their inventories and judged their inventory levels to be about right. San Francisco reported no sign of major inventory building at the retail level in that District, and Richmond noticed no change in trade inventories. New York and Boston, however, saw some evidence of moderate inventory building at the retail level. The Minneapolis Bank directors cited high finance costs, better management, and better-than-expected sales as possible reasons why inventory-to-sales ratios were remaining relatively low. Crop conditions are generally good to excellent in the St. Louis, Chicago, Kansas City, and San Francisco Districts. However, cool weather and excessive rainfall have hurt crops in the Richmond District, and New York and Philadelphia report some crop damage due to flood conditions. Rain also slowed the Kansas wheat harvest, but the 1972 crop may still rank among the largest on record. Prices for both crops and livestock are reported to be favorable for increasing farm income this year, especially in view of generally high levels of production. While employment gains were reported in some Districts, the uptrend is apparently still rather slow. Some manufacturers in the Richmond and Philadelphia Districts expect to increase their employment and lengthen workweeks. Nonfarm payroll employment is expanding moderately in the Cleveland District, and the insured unemployment rate has turned down. The unemployment rate for the five southwestern states in the Dallas District is at a low 4.4 percent, but employment analysts there are not optimistic about gains in employment during the rest of 1972. The demand for all types of loans is apparently strong in nearly every District and advancing at a steady pace. Cleveland did note, however, that business loan demand over the June tax date was less than a year ago in their District. The supply of loanable funds at banks is adequate, but in the Chicago District the volume of outstanding CD's has been rising. While interest rates are apparently little changed, St. Louis and San Francisco noted a slight rise in rates."
1972-08-09,national,overall,"Overall, district banks report a quickening economic pace and an increasing degree of optimism about the business expansion. Industrial activity is continuing up on a wide front. However, little or no change in unemployment is reported by most districts. Retail sales are up substantially, with automobile sales particularly brisk. Construction continues at a high level with housing starts strong in many districts. Most districts are experiencing slow or negligible increases in inventories. Commercial banks are experiencing strong loan demand. In the coming months interest rates are generally expected to rise, with short-term rates leading longer rates upward. Prices are continuing up in most areas. Overall, district banks report a quickening economic pace and an increasing degree of optimism about the business expansion. Industrial activity is continuing up on a wide front. However, little or no change in unemployment is reported by most districts. Retail sales are up substantially, with automobile sales particularly brisk. Construction continues at a high level with housing starts strong in many districts. Most districts are experiencing slow or negligible increases in inventories. Commercial banks are experiencing strong loan demand. In the coming months interest rates are generally expected to rise, with short-term rates leading longer rates upward. Prices are continuing up in most areas. On the production front, order backlogs, new orders, and shipments are generally up. Atlanta, St. Louis, and Dallas report strong increases while New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Kansas City are experiencing significant but less noteworthy rises. Richmond reports a slight decline in the backlog of orders for some firms in that district but shipments are at a constant rate. In general, the employment picture appears to be improving only slightly at best. In Dallas the unemployment rate recently fell as low as 4.3 per cent. And, Chicago and St. Louis report modest improvements too. Most districts, however, report no change in their job markets. Serious pockets of joblessness are reported in parts of the San Francisco and Richmond Districts. Most districts report fair to strong increases in retail sales. Auto sales are mentioned as a leading gainer in the reports from Richmond, Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco. Chicago commented that some retail trade analysts are becoming disillusioned with the surveys of consumer intentions to which they subscribe; at least two of these surveys have issued forecasts of lackluster consumer spending in recent months. In most districts the demand for loans is strong. Boston reports its loan demand is ""very strong"" in the real estate and consumer areas. Business loans ""grew substantially"" at Cleveland. ""Loan commitments are heavy"" in Chicago. At Kansas City local businesses are the leading borrowers. All loan categories are up sharply in Dallas with business loans up the most. Deposits are increasing in St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. About the only questions raised concerning interest rates are how much interest rates will rise, and exactly when the rise will start. The various districts are having a mixed experience with respect to the business investment sector. No areas are reporting general increases. Cleveland and New York referred to faster inventory accumulation. But, most districts discuss cautious inventory policies as reasons for lack of investment in this area. Capital spending for machine tools was up ""dramatically"" in Chicago. But no broadbased upward trend in plant and equipment outlay is reported. Most of the reports indicate that construction activity appears to have leveled off at the high plateau attained in late 1971. Total construction is being sustained by strong residential housing demand, while non-residential building is performing less impressively in several Districts. New York's Directors expressed concern over possible increasing rates of inflation, and one of Boston's academic consultants voiced similar views. But, most districts had little or no comment about expected changes in the general price level. In the agricultural sector, Philadelphia finds that some crop prices are rising. Richmond reports tobacco prices are at an all time high. Increasing prices for corn, soybeans, wheat, cattle, potatoes, and some fruits were mentioned in the reports issued by Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. Farmers are enjoying increased incomes in the Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas Districts. Although the costs of farming are higher than last year, farm receipts are expected to be up even more because of higher commodity prices and good harvests. In spite of higher farm incomes, Minneapolis furnished some data suggesting that farm spending was decreasing. Bad weather hurt fruit growers and canners in Utah and many farmers around the Harrisburg, Pennsylvania area. Some bankruptcies are likely to result from these unfortunate local weather conditions."
1972-09-13,national,overall,"In general, the District banks report continuing business expansion and a good measure of optimism about future prospects. With few exceptions, retail sales are reportedly doing well. Home building nationwide has fallen back from peaks earlier in the year, but remains very strong in selected areas. Commercial banks are experiencing good loan demand from consumers and small business, while demand from national corporations is more restrained. The employment picture appears to have strengthened a bit further, and expectations of further employment gains were variously noted. The agricultural situation was almost uniformly described as bright, with farm output, income and investment up. In general, the District banks report continuing business expansion and a good measure of optimism about future prospects. With few exceptions, retail sales are reportedly doing well. Home building nationwide has fallen back from peaks earlier in the year, but remains very strong in selected areas. Commercial banks are experiencing good loan demand from consumers and small business, while demand from national corporations is more restrained. The employment picture appears to have strengthened a bit further, and expectations of further employment gains were variously noted. The agricultural situation was almost uniformly described as bright, with farm output, income and investment up. Retail sales were said to be ""particularly good"" in Philadelphia; strong or improving in the Richmond, Chicago, Minneapolis and San Francisco and Dallas Districts, but only moderate or mixed in St. Louis, Kansas City, New York, and Cleveland. Atlanta and Boston report that the summer tourist season had been strong, but Boston said that vacationers had been ""quite careful"" with their money. Chicago noted a significant rise in domestic airline traffic. There was some evidence of increased capital spending. Philadelphia District businessmen expect to increase plant and equipment expenditures within the next six months. Chicago reports that most District producers of capital equipment have been experiencing higher sales and orders, with good prospects for the future. New York also cited some evidence of a strong capital spending outlook for 1973, and Atlanta reported the announcement of several large commercial construction projects, including hotel and office buildings. A survey by Minneapolis found a significant increase in local firms reporting plant capacity as ""less than needed"". Construction activity remains at a high level, but District trends are mixed. Atlanta characterized building activity in its District as being of boom proportion. A generally favorable construction picture is also reported by the Richmond and San Francisco Banks. St. Louis reports that while construction activity has apparently leveled off, it has done so at a relatively high rate. Similarly, though the Dallas Bank reports a decline since June, it notes that such activity remains well above last year's level. Cleveland states that residential contracts appear to have peaked in the May-June period and to have declined sharply in July. The nationwide employment situation appears to have improved further on balance. Richmond reports increases in employment and hours worked per week, and both Richmond and Atlanta found shortages of labor in some areas of their Districts. New York noted shortages of skilled construction workers, and Chicago reported both an increase in help wanted advertising and inadequate supply of quality workers. The unemployment rate is down further in San Francisco. Some other reports pointed to little current change in the job market but, among these, Philadelphia and Dallas found some evidence pointing to future improvement. Reports from some Banks indicated that concern over inflation remains strong. A number of New York's directors cited the inflationary implications of the large and widening Federal budget and of the heavy calendar of wage negotiations in 1973. Businessmen contacted by Philadelphia expected inflation to be more of a problem in the future. Encouragingly, however, Kansas City found evidence in the agricultural situation that the pressure would be off food prices for the remainder of the year. In this connection, most Banks discussing agriculture-Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas and San Francisco-all reported good agricultural prospects as a result of both higher prices and high production, though Richmond said the outlook in that District is for reduced crops and farm income."
1972-10-11,national,overall,"Comments from the District banks uniformly emphasize the strong pace of the current economic expansion. Near-term prospects for both consumer spending and business investment continue to be excellent. Strong income gains in the agricultural sector are bolstering retail trade and outlays for farm machinery and equipment. Construction remains at a high level in most Districts. Signs of overbuilding in certain areas, however, suggest an adjustment in 1973. Labor market conditions generally continue to show improvement, and some Districts are experiencing labor shortages. Businessmen and economists expressed concern over the possibility of renewed inflationary pressures in 1973, and over what public policy measures might be taken to counteract those pressures. Reports were mixed on the effectiveness of wage-price controls and their future prospects. Commercial banks are experiencing strong loan demand, especially from the consumer sector. Comments from the District banks uniformly emphasize the strong pace of the current economic expansion. Near-term prospects for both consumer spending and business investment continue to be excellent. Strong income gains in the agricultural sector are bolstering retail trade and outlays for farm machinery and equipment. Construction remains at a high level in most Districts. Signs of overbuilding in certain areas, however, suggest an adjustment in 1973. Labor market conditions generally continue to show improvement, and some Districts are experiencing labor shortages. Businessmen and economists expressed concern over the possibility of renewed inflationary pressures in 1973, and over what public policy measures might be taken to counteract those pressures. Reports were mixed on the effectiveness of wage-price controls and their future prospects. Commercial banks are experiencing strong loan demand, especially from the consumer sector. Concern about the reemergence of inflation during 1973 was the most frequently mentioned problem on the economic horizon. Banks specifically commenting on the problem of renewed inflation include Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and St. Louis. On the subject of controls, Atlanta mentioned that businessmen are concerned about the inadequacies of wage-price controls, while St. Louis reported reservations among businessmen regarding the future effectiveness of controls. A comment picked up by New York was that continued wage controls (but presumably not price controls) seem to be a ""necessary evil"" if the problem of cost-push inflation is to be solved. Chicago underscores the effectiveness of Price Commission rulings in many industries, and business economists in Cleveland maintain that sentiment among large firms is for a continuation of controls next year. Banks generally reported that retail sales continued to register strong growth in recent weeks. Higher livestock and grain prices have contributed importantly to retail trade in Minneapolis and have stimulated sales of farm equipment. Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco also commented on bright agricultural income conditions. In Richmond, however, the gain in agricultural income is below the national average. There are signs that the upswing in business fixed investment is gaining momentum. Philadelphia reported businessmen's plans for capital spending are being stepped up, while Richmond noted an increased number of manufacturers whose current plant capacity is too low relative to desired levels. Atlanta mentioned heavy capital spending on projects for pollution control and that investment is being undertaken primarily to reduce costs rather than to increase capacity. In Chicago, excellent consumer demand for recreational vehicles has spurred producers to expand capacity. Farm machinery producers in the Chicago District are pleased with domestic and foreign demand and plan to operate at a higher level than normal during the winter. San Francisco sees plant and equipment spending rising strongly in 1973, with heavy outlays required for pollution control. On the financial sides, commercial banks are experiencing strong loan demand, particularly for mortgages and consumer credit. Business economists in the Cleveland District do not expect a credit crunch to materialize in 1973, although they anticipate some edging up of interest rates. In Kansas City, bankers are concerned about the possibility of disintermediation. San Francisco reports that banks are reasonably liquid and in a position to meet increased loan demand without major increases in interest rates."
1972-11-14,national,overall,"According to bank reports, economic activity is improving and is expected to remain strong. Retail sales have been increasing and retailers expect Christmas spending to be heavy. Order backlogs are swelling in several areas as the tempo of manufacturing activity picks up; inventory building is also anticipated. Several districts report robust construction activity. Although problems are noted, the agricultural situation is termed ""strong."" Labor shortages are developing in some areas as the demand for workers strengthens. A moderate rate of inflation and continued gains in loan demand are expected during coming months. According to bank reports, economic activity is improving and is expected to remain strong. Retail sales have been increasing and retailers expect Christmas spending to be heavy. Order backlogs are swelling in several areas as the tempo of manufacturing activity picks up; inventory building is also anticipated. Several districts report robust construction activity. Although problems are noted, the agricultural situation is termed ""strong."" Labor shortages are developing in some areas as the demand for workers strengthens. A moderate rate of inflation and continued gains in loan demand are expected during coming months. The consumer spending outlook can be termed ""favorable."" Retailers in the New York district are optimistic about Christmas spending and those in the San Francisco district are looking for a 10 percent year-to-year Christmas sales gain. Recent increases in consumer spending are reported by Richmond, Chicago, Dallas and St. Louis. Automobile sales, however, are being held down by inventory shortages in several districts. Reports disclose improved manufacturing activity. St. Louis reports gains in manufacturing sales and reveals shortages developing in the cement and paper industries. Boston indicates that several of its district manufacturers are operating at capacity. Capital good sales are expanding in the Chicago district and order backlogs are climbing. Increased inventories are planned by several Kansas City district manufacturers. Richmond reports that manufacturing shipments, new orders and backlogs are rising. In the Atlanta district plant and equipment expenditures continue to expand. The seasonally adjusted Texas industrial production index experienced a sharp increase in September with all major industrial sectors advancing. Philadelphia, however, indicates some leveling off in manufacturing activity. Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco all report strong construction activity. In the Sixth District, several major commercial projects and tourist attraction expansions are planned, and shortages of building materials are evident in some areas. Although national construction activity appears to be strong, there is vacant commercial space in Seattle, and very low commercial construction activity in St. Louis. Richmond suggests that the rate of increase in building appears to have slowed; and Dallas reports that residential and nonbuilding construction awards in the district have declined. Agriculture continues strong. It is, however, encountering some apparently temporary difficulties in certain areas and for certain products. In the Midwest, crop damage and harvesting problems were caused by unseasonally wet weather. Recent income from tobacco sales has been disappointing in   the Southeast. Prices for fattened livestock have weakened. But Minneapolis describes farmers, in general, as ""cautiously optimistic"" and cites strengthening loan demand for farm operating investments. Dallas concurs with the optimistic description, citing very high farm receipts, and Kansas City mentions thriving agribusiness industries. The employment picture continues to brighten, leading to increased labor shortages in some parts of the nation. Expanding demand for labor is reported by Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City and Dallas while New York indicates that the belt tightening period has ended and labor demand is starting to build. Labor shortages especially among skilled workmen, evidenced by increased turnover and absenteeism are reported by Chicago and St. Louis. Availability of nonunion labor, however, prevented trucking and building trade unions from pressing for large wage settlements in the Chicago district. The outlook for wage and price increases differs, to some extent, in each district that reported on inflation. With the exception o£ Atlanta, where inflationary pressures remain strong, the expected rate of inflation for next year is generally termed ""moderate."" This assumes that some   wage-price regulations continue through 1973. Farm prices should, in coming months, exert less upward pressure on consumer prices then they have recently. There are mixed reports on both loan demands and deposit increases throughout the nation. A number of districts report relatively strong or expanding loan growth particularly in the business, mortgage, and consumer credit areas. In the San Francisco district, strong loan demand is reported for mortgage and consumer credit—although the strength of business loans varied throughout the district. St. Louis reports "
1972-12-19,national,overall,"Economic activity around the Nation is maintaining its forward momentum according to reports from the twelve Districts. And, the outlook for 1973 ranges from optimistic in several Districts to ""almost universally ebullient"" in the Seventh District. Orders, inventories, and shipments of manufacturers were reported on the rise, and manufacturing employment is expanding. Retail sales are strong, and the 1972 Christmas season is expected to result in sales well above the 1971 level. Construction activity has generally remained at high levels or expanded further, but signs of weakness in construction were noted by several Districts. With the economy continuing to expand, shortages of labor and materials were noted as emerging problems. Wet weather has curtailed the harvest of several crops and inflicted some losses, but the overall farm income situation remains favorable. Loan demand continues strong at banks, but trends in deposits have varied significantly between Districts. Economic activity around the Nation is maintaining its forward momentum according to reports from the twelve Districts. And, the outlook for 1973 ranges from optimistic in several Districts to ""almost universally ebullient"" in the Seventh District. Orders, inventories, and shipments of manufacturers were reported on the rise, and manufacturing employment is expanding. Retail sales are strong, and the 1972 Christmas season is expected to result in sales well above the 1971 level. Construction activity has generally remained at high levels or expanded further, but signs of weakness in construction were noted by several Districts. With the economy continuing to expand, shortages of labor and materials were noted as emerging problems. Wet weather has curtailed the harvest of several crops and inflicted some losses, but the overall farm income situation remains favorable. Loan demand continues strong at banks, but trends in deposits have varied significantly between Districts. Manufacturing activity was reported on a noticeable upswing according to survey results reported by the Cleveland, Richmond, and Minneapolis banks. Steel shipments were cited as especially strong in the Cleveland report, and steel economists predicted a record year for steel shipments in 1973. Chicago noted that auto and truck production was at high levels and further gains were expected in 1973. However, in the Philadelphia District, manufacturers reported a lull in their December orders while maintaining an optimistic view about the next six-month period. The increase in business activity continues to generate expectations of higher levels of capital spending. Several directors of the Boston bank anticipated large increases in capital spending in 1973 because of the approach of production to capacity levels. Atlanta reported that the construction of numerous small plants had been announced recently in the Southeast, and Chicago indicated that auto makers were accelerating their capital spending plans. However, St. Louis reported complaints from businessmen in their District that profit margins were not sufficient in some industries to stimulate plant and equipment spending even though utilization rates were near capacity. Although construction activity is still characterized as strong in most Districts, there is growing concern about possible overbuilding of multi-family residential units. Cleveland, Boston, New York, San Francisco, and Minneapolis all indicated that apartment and/or condominium construction may be excessive in parts of their Districts. Although several Districts suggested the possibility of a decline in housing activity in 1973, the extent of the possible decline was not large. Builders in the St. Louis District were reported to be optimistic about further gains in construction in 1973, including an increase in single-family housing for the St. Louis metropolitan area. Atlanta reported numerous large-scale construction projects—both residential and nonresidential—in the Southeast, especially in Atlanta and in central Florida. Retail sales are rising and the outlook for the months ahead is favorable. All of the Districts commenting on retail trade indicate that 1972 Christmas sales should be well ahead of last year. San Francisco and Chicago noted that luxury and ""big ticket"" items were selling well. And Kansas City reported that the strong auto sales included many of the more expensive models or models with large amounts of optional equipment. Although reporting retail sales as generally good, Minneapolis indicated that sales of winter recreational vehicles had not been up to the earlier expectations of one manufacturer. Employment is expanding in most areas and declines in unemployment were mentioned by several Districts. Dallas reported a record level of employment in the Eleventh District states in October as a result of widespread gains. In the Third District, Philadelphia noted that the unemployment rate had fallen from 5.7 to 4.5 percent in the last three months. Atlanta indicated that unemployment rates in several southeastern states were at their lowest levels in years. With the gains in employment, some signs of labor shortages were reported by the Atlanta, St. Louis, Richmond, and Chicago Districts. And Chicago noted that turnover rates and absenteeism were rising at firms in the Seventh District. The generally favorable agricultural situation has been set back somewhat by wet weather in the Midwest, Southeast, and Southwest that delayed the soybean, sorghum, and cotton harvests. Kansas City indicates that the production of soybeans and sorghum will fall below the November crop report estimate, and Atlanta cited a loss of 30 million bushels of soybeans in Tennessee. The extent of the losses in the Chicago District was uncertain, but it was noted that the overall farm outlook was still the most favorable in many years. Dallas reports that the cotton yield continues to look good, but the delay in harvesting may hurt the quality of the crop. While the wet weather hurt production in most areas, Florida citrus and vegetable growers were aided by the moisture. Loan demand was reported to be generally strong by Dallas, Kansas City, and Richmond. Consumer installment loans and mortgage loans were mentioned as areas of strength by bankers in the Cleveland and Philadelphia Districts. The trend of bank deposits varied considerably among the Districts. Cleveland reported a strong rise in deposits while Kansas City and Philadelphia indicated that deposits were largely unchanged. Bankers in the Kansas City District are trying to attract additional deposits by offering higher rates on CD's than currently prevail in the New York market. Banks are apparently not experiencing a shortage of funds, and Cleveland reports that most banks in the Fourth District are highly liquid."
1973-01-10,national,overall,"The overall impression conveyed by the District Banks' reports is that the economic expansion of 1972 continued undiminished at the turn of the year and was perhaps gathering additional momentum. Retailers generally enjoyed a very good Christmas season, and many were reported to be quite optimistic about sales prospects over the months ahead. Business confidence improved further, as evidenced by increased actual or planned outlays on plant and equipment. Manufacturing activity has quickened, with increases reported in new orders, shipments and backlogs. And while housing construction on balance appears to have peaked out, it remains at very high levels. The unemployment situation improved somewhat further, and there were frequent reports of a growing shortage of skilled and semi-skilled labor. On the dark side, however, concern continued to be voiced over the outlook for further inflation. The overall impression conveyed by the District Banks' reports is that the economic expansion of 1972 continued undiminished at the turn of the year and was perhaps gathering additional momentum. Retailers generally enjoyed a very good Christmas season, and many were reported to be quite optimistic about sales prospects over the months ahead. Business confidence improved further, as evidenced by increased actual or planned outlays on plant and equipment. Manufacturing activity has quickened, with increases reported in new orders, shipments and backlogs. And while housing construction on balance appears to have peaked out, it remains at very high levels. The unemployment situation improved somewhat further, and there were frequent reports of a growing shortage of skilled and semi-skilled labor. On the dark side, however, concern continued to be voiced over the outlook for further inflation. One of the brightest spots in the latest District reports was the strength in consumer spending over the Christmas season. Moreover, retail sales were reported as continuing strong during the post-holiday period. To be sure, the phrases used to describe the strength of Christmas sales varied somewhat, from the ""continued to expand"", ""were generally reported good"" or ""continued strong"" (Richmond, Kansas and Dallas, respectively) to ""extremely vigorous:; ""very strong"" and reaching ""record levels"" (Chicago, Cleveland and San Francisco). It thus appears that nationwide consumer spending was well above that of the 1971 holiday season, frequently surpassing retailers' expectations. An optimistic outlook regarding sales over the months ahead, moreover, was mentioned by a number of districts, including Minneapolis, St. Louis and San Francisco. Boston also reported an unusually high rate of reordering from retail stores for this time of the year. Against this background, reports from a number of Banks, including Cleveland, St. Louis, Richmond and Chicago, pointed to a further improvement in the industrial production picture, with manufacturers' new orders, shipments, and backlogs on the rise. Cleveland reports strong demand for steel, and that output in certain other durable good industries that had been sluggish since 1970 is beginning to rise. St. Louis notes that all manufacturing industries in that District reported higher levels of output in recent months. The Texas production index reached record levels. A number of Districts, including Cleveland, reported constraints on production stemming either from capacity limitations, difficulties in obtaining supply, fuel shortages (in part due to cold weather), or from a shortage of skilled labor. Most reports on construction suggest that total activity in that industry, on balance, has stabilized at or near recent high levels. In certain areas, including the Richmond and St. Louis Districts, a rise in nonresidential construction offset declines in residential building activity. There were indications that the employment picture has continued to improve somewhat. Boston reports tightness in some labor markets in the midst of pockets of high unemployment. Cleveland notes that employment in that District continues to expand at a more rapid rate than in the nation. Richmond reports a severe shortage of textile workers, and Chicago, St. Louis and Dallas all note increases in employment in their areas. Concern over inflation remains in evidence. Philadelphia reports that over one-half of the respondents in its monthly business outlook survey expect to pay higher prices over the next six months. Atlanta states that the main concern of businessmen is that inflationary pressures will mount. Dallas, St. Louis and Boston respondents voiced expectations of further price increases. Respondents in a number of Districts remarked that the rise in certain farm products would eventually be reflected at the retail level."
1973-02-07,national,overall,"On the whole the economy continues strong. Manufacturing activity is rising in most areas and is expected to continue upward. Labor markets are tightening and some labor shortages are reported. Inventory investment is reported to be rising only slightly, but plant and equipment spending is increasing as some manufacturers find themselves operating at near-capacity levels. Residential construction is continuing at a high level in most districts. Commercial construction is rising according to some reports. Retail sales generally remain strong. Farmers are making larger than average incomes despite various operating problems. However, on the darker side, inflationary expectations are rising significantly. Bankers report some credit tightening and frequently mention rising interest rates. On the whole the economy continues strong. Manufacturing activity is rising in most areas and is expected to continue upward. Labor markets are tightening and some labor shortages are reported. Inventory investment is reported to be rising only slightly, but plant and equipment spending is increasing as some manufacturers find themselves operating at near-capacity levels. Residential construction is continuing at a high level in most districts. Commercial construction is rising according to some reports. Retail sales generally remain strong. Farmers are making larger than average incomes despite various operating problems. However, on the darker side, inflationary expectations are rising significantly. Bankers report some credit tightening and frequently mention rising interest rates. Production activity is rising. Most districts report increases in new orders, shipments, order backlogs or similar barometers of manufacturing activity. Some districts (St. Louis, Richmond, Boston) talk of strong increases in output. Durables manufacturers are mentioned with more frequency than non-durables producers in the various districts' discussions of rising manufacturing. The Richmond district's furniture manufacturers are operating at a high level of output despite labor shortages. San Francisco reports that activity at Seattle's Boeing facilities are picking up. Cleveland refers to ""dramatic increases in orders for machine tools."" Labor markets are tightening in some places. The Dallas report speaks of ""particularly buoyant"" employment opportunities. Labor shortages are reported in central Florida. In St. Louis labor markets are ""very tight"" and employment for Research and Development personnel is picking up. No general labor shortage appears to exist, however. Minneapolis, for example, reports no shortage of skilled labor. Boston reports both labor shortages and pockets of high unemployment. Manufacturing jobs in Philadelphia aren't presently increasing. Cutbacks in the Federal budget are mentioned as a possible cause of unemployment pockets in some locales. Most districts discussing inventories (New York, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Richmond) report that spending from this sector is not bullish. New York mentions ""no discernible change in inventory."" Cleveland talks about inventory investment leveling off at a lower level. Plant and equipment spending is on the rise. The steel industry and consumer durables manufacturers in Cleveland's district are expected to expand their facilities. Chicago reports that an informal survey there revealed that manufacturers in the following fields are operating near full capacity: paper, petroleum, refining, machine tools, appliances, furniture, color television, trucks, recreational vehicles, electric motors, construction machinery, flat rolled steel, foundries, tool and die shops, lumber, gypsum board, insulating material, fertilizer and certain chemicals. Many firms in Philadelphia's monthly survey are currently reporting plans for increased plant and equipment outlays. Residential construction is expected to rise or at least continue unabated in most districts. Minneapolis conducted a telephone survey of HUD officials and found that ""the freeze on subsidized housing should not effect district homebuilding in 1973, but could dampen residential construction in 1974 and 1975."" However, Atlanta and Dallas do refer to diminishing rates of housing starts. San Francisco expects that its high level of construction may turn down. The reports on non-residential construction are mostly bullish. The outlook for retail sales is generally good, although some districts do report that sales are still recovering from a lull that followed holiday buying. San Francisco's sales expectations are optimistic and   they point out that tax refunds should boost consumers' spending this spring. Inflationary expectations are rising on a broad front. Chicago reports that the oil companies there are not entering into their usual one or two-year contracts with oil truckers and other large users because of expected price rises. Philadelphia reports that the respondents to its survey report significant increases in their expectations about prices for the second month in a row. Minneapolis reports that some labor unions there plan to disregard the 5.5% wage guideline. New York reports that a number of its respondents are so concerned about inflation they think that price controls are probably necessary.
  Most bankers across the nation are experiencing rising loan demand from businessmen and consumers. Applications for mortgages also show few signs of diminishing. Some Boston bankers are being more restrictive in granting lines of credit. Time and savings deposits are providing a small amount of new funds in most of the cases reported.
"
1973-03-14,national,overall,"This month's District Red Book reports, on balance, describes the current and prospective pace of business activity as very strong, in some cases reaching boom proportions. Consumer and business investment spending showed impressive strength, and construction remained at a high level. Employment was rising. On the negative side, evidence of increasing strains on productive capacity was emerging, with widespread lengthening delivery schedules and growing shortages of labor as well as materials. Prices were rising and serious doubts were frequently expressed regarding the probable effectiveness of Phase Three in controlling inflation. Countrywide, little concern was expressed over recent international financial developments. This month's District Red Book reports, on balance, describes the current and prospective pace of business activity as very strong, in some cases reaching boom proportions. Consumer and business investment spending showed impressive strength, and construction remained at a high level. Employment was rising. On the negative side, evidence of increasing strains on productive capacity was emerging, with widespread lengthening delivery schedules and growing shortages of labor as well as materials. Prices were rising and serious doubts were frequently expressed regarding the probable effectiveness of Phase Three in controlling inflation. Countrywide, little concern was expressed over recent international financial developments. All Banks reported continued advances in economic activity. The assessments ranged from ""boom"", ""near boom"", and ""most vigorous in many years"" (Kansas, Cleveland and Chicago), to a somewhat more restrained expectation of continued expansion at least until mid-1973 (San Francisco and Dallas). Reports of strength in both consumer spending and in business outlays for plant and equipment were widespread. Atlanta reported that many retailers are expecting a banner year. San Francisco characterized consumer spending as generally ""vigorous"", especially for automobiles and durables, and a number of major retailers in the Richmond District reported sales to be considerably higher than year ago levels. Similar reports emanated from most other Banks. Plant and equipment outlays were reported as especially strong (San Francisco), brisk (Atlanta), and continuing at a high level (Philadelphia). A number of Richmond District manufacturers indicated current plant and equipment capacity to be at lower than desired levels. Further evidence of strong capital spending was provided by a number of reports of large order inflows in the capital goods industry, including among others, the Boston, Cleveland, Chicago and St. Louis Districts. A number of Banks also reported a high level of commercial construction, in some instances (Atlanta) reaching boom proportions. On the darker side, the brisk pace of economic activity has led to mounting strains on productive capacity. Most Banks reported rising backlogs of orders—in some cases to record or near record levels—and lengthening of delivery times. Similarly, there were frequent reports of actual and anticipated shortages of a wide range of basic raw materials, including steel, chemicals and construction materials (notably lumber)—and of semi-finished and finished products as well. The employment picture has tightened further, and shortages of skilled and semi-skilled labor were reported by a number of Districts. Against this background, concern over the prospects of a heightening of inflationary pressures was widely reported to be on the rise. For example, the Philadelphia report states that inflationary expectations are high and rising, and some respondents in the St. Louis and New York Districts deemed inflation to now be the chief current economic problem. Similar expressions of concern appear in most other reports. Indeed, rising prices are pointed to by well over half of the Banks. In this context, considerable doubt was expressed about the effectiveness of Phase Three in controlling inflation, particularly on the wage side. Dallas reports that the introduction of Phase Three had caused a number of its respondents to alter their expectations regarding prices, which they now foresee rising much faster than previously thought likely. Turning to the credit scene, most Districts reported a strong demand for bank loans, especially consumer loans. Several Districts reported a slowing down in the rate of deposits, and growing banker concern over disintermediation was mentioned by several Districts, including Philadelphia, Dallas, Kansas and Boston. In general, little concern was expressed over the domestic impact of the recent international financial disturbances. Respondents in the San Francisco and New York Districts felt that the recent devaluation of the dollar should help stimulate exports."
1973-04-11,national,overall,"This month's district Red Book reports indicate that the current vigorous expansion is increasingly straining capacity. Raw material shortages, lengthening delivery times and difficulties in finding skilled labor are emerging. Inflation is again the major economic concern with recent price increases rekindling inflationary fears. This month's district Red Book reports indicate that the current vigorous expansion is increasingly straining capacity. Raw material shortages, lengthening delivery times and difficulties in finding skilled labor are emerging. Inflation is again the major economic concern with recent price increases rekindling inflationary fears. All districts reported continuing gains in economic activity, with most Banks describing business conditions in terms like ""robust"" (Atlanta), ""expanding at a rapid pace"" (Cleveland and Dallas), and ""strong"" (Minneapolis). The labor picture, however, varies sharply among districts. Dallas reports the unemployment rate dropping to 3.6 percent, while the First District is still experiencing unemployment rates above 6 percent. Philadelphia reports modest gains in employment, while Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Atlanta, and St. Louis have tight labor markets with significant skilled labor shortages. Growing raw material shortages and lengthening delivery times were also mentioned by most Banks. Shortages of petroleum products, wood products and nonferrous metals were cited by New York, while gasoline rationing was noted in parts of the Atlanta and Dallas districts. The Dallas Bank reports that oil companies believe that rationing is a ""definite possibility"" and Chicago reports that fuel shortages in the Midwest are the ""worst in the world"" with oil firms refusing new customers and placing ceilings on sales. The concern expressed by a New York director that ""widespread raw material shortages—rather than plant capacity—seemed likely to lead to production bottlenecks over the coming months"" appeared evident in many Bank reports (Boston, Kansas City, Cleveland, St. Louis, Chicago, and Atlanta). High levels of construction activity were described by several Banks. Residential construction is described as strong (Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and San Francisco) despite rapid price increases (Kansas City and Atlanta) and recent increases in mortgage rates (Kansas City, Cleveland, and Chicago). Commercial construction is reported as heavy by Atlanta, but ""spotty"" by St. Louis, and Dallas notes a recent decline in contract awards. Capital spending by business is a major source of strength. New plant construction and expansions are reported (Atlanta, St. Louis). Boston reports that the machine tool industry is experiencing rapidly rising orders and backlogs double those of a year ago. Chicago and Cleveland report that steel mills are operating at full capacity and that ""near-boom conditions"" exist in manufacturing in their districts. Chicago reports that one large steel producer has started rationing, because orders exceed capacity. Most Banks reported mounting concern about inflationary pressures and many district reports noted dissatisfactions with Phase 3 (Boston, New York, San Francisco). The feeling that Phase 3 has triggered ""a new wave of inflationary expectations"" (New York) and that inflation was again the major economic problem was widespread. Philadelphia reports that two-thirds of surveyed firms are currently encountering rising costs for raw materials and over half are charging higher prices for their goods. Boston notes that skyrocketing price increases for materials appear to be coming from medium-sized firms which are not being carefully scrutinized under Phase 3 rules. District reports on agriculture do not indicate any immediate alleviation in the supply-demand imbalance. Heavy rains are reported as delaying plantings (Kansas City and St. Louis) and hampering the movement of livestock to market (Kansas City), while transport delays have held up grain shipments (Chicago). Dallas, however, reports favorable conditions in the Southwest and the shifting of acreage into crops in short supply. Cleveland, Chicago, and Kansas City report that farmers responded to the meat boycott by withholding supplies, thus keeping up prices, but that this may lead to heavy marketings in the coming weeks. Bank loan demand was described as very high (San Francisco, Chicago, Richmond, St. Louis, Kansas City, Boston). Reactions to the proposed dual prime rate were mixed, but those commenting saw administrative complications. San Francisco notes concern that the two-tier system will be ""the first step toward a complex system of selective credit controls,"" while Kansas City and Minneapolis report concern that the community's size or whether it is a national or regional borrower be taken into account in defining large and small businesses."
1973-05-09,national,overall,"In May, as in April, the 12 Redbook reports paint a picture of an overheated economy that retains strong upward momentum. Concern over inflation and the impact that increases in the cost of living will have on union negotiations is reported by several banks. Shortages of materials and manpower are widespread and are growing worse. Agricultural areas in the Midwest and South have been hard hit by heavy rains and floods. Capital expenditure programs are gathering strength in all districts. Some banks reported views of respondents who believe that real GNP will rise at a slower race in the second half because of declines in residential construction and in purchases of consumer durables. The business loan increase has slackened in major centers, but credit growth, overall, continues at a rapid pace. In May, as in April, the 12 Redbook reports paint a picture of an overheated economy that retains strong upward momentum. Concern over inflation and the impact that increases in the cost of living will have on union negotiations is reported by several banks. Shortages of materials and manpower are widespread and are growing worse. Agricultural areas in the Midwest and South have been hard hit by heavy rains and floods. Capital expenditure programs are gathering strength in all districts. Some banks reported views of respondents who believe that real GNP will rise at a slower race in the second half because of declines in residential construction and in purchases of consumer durables. The business loan increase has slackened in major centers, but credit growth, overall, continues at a rapid pace. Most banks found capital expenditures gathering strength. A group of Cleveland economists expects gains in capital outlays to continue in 1974, with the year as a whole up 10 percent from 1973. San Francisco found commercial aircraft orders up sharply. Atlanta listed major new projects in a variety of fields. Philadelphia could find no firm that was reducing capital outlays. Most banks commented on growing stringency in local labor markets. Only Boston was worried about continued high rates of unemployment. In the Chicago district, employment standards have been lowered and training programs have been reactivated. Shortages of materials and components were emphasized by Boston, Chicago, Richmond, New York, and Minneapolis. Tight supplies of oil products, steel, nonferrous metals, electricity, lumber, and components and shortages of freight cars were holding down increases in output. Cleveland, Richmond, and St. Louis reported that manufacturers' inventories of finished goods were being reduced to meet customer demands. Consumer purchases remain at very high levels everywhere, but a number of businessmen in the New York and Cleveland districts believed that consumers were buying in advance to beat price increases. Sales of autos and appliances, at least, were thought to be at unsustainable levels. Gasoline shortages were emphasized by Atlanta, Chicago, and Minneapolis. Dallas reports output of crude oil to be declining despite the elimination of controls. Persian oil has been brought to the Texas area for the first time. Most banks appear to accept the view that residential construction will decline significantly in the second half. But a number of banks, including Minneapolis, New York, and Atlanta, found that the residential sector remains very strong currently. The agricultural situation probably has never before received as much space in the Redbook reports. Heavy rains have slowed plantings in the Kansas City, St. Louis, Chicago, Dallas, and Atlanta districts. (San Francisco reports a drought in the Northwest!) Plantings of corn, soybeans, cotton, rice, and sugarcane all are behind schedule. In addition, beef supplies have been held down by losses of cattle, poor gains in weight, and the recent order to stop use of the DES hormone drug that stimulates growth. But farmers are generally optimistic about income prospects. Purchases of farm equipment are at very high levels, and farmland values in the Corn Belt have increased by a record amount in the past year. Some banks reported slower growth in business loans, but loan growth, overall, continues at a rapid pace. Upward pressures on short- term interest rates continue. Funds for farm, consumer, and residential mortgage loans remain in good supply. One Boston professor expects continued strength in activity because of rising capital expenditures, while another expects slower growth because of reduced consumer demands. Both professors think the situation calls for an easier monetary policy."
1973-06-13,national,overall,"Reports by the Reserve Banks indicate that the economy has continued to expand vigorously in recent weeks. However, the rate of expansion has apparently slowed in the residential construction industry, and   a number of Banks reported expectations of a more moderate rate of expansion in the overall economy in the second half of the year. Reports by the Reserve Banks indicate that the economy has continued to expand vigorously in recent weeks. However, the rate of expansion has apparently slowed in the residential construction industry, and   a number of Banks reported expectations of a more moderate rate of expansion in the overall economy in the second half of the year. Retail sales have generally continued strongly upward. The most common report was that sales continue to rise at about the same rate as in recent months. However, some softening in retail trade was detected in the Fourth District, especially in appliance sales, and a Minneapolis Director associated with the retail industry reported that a slowdown in consumer spending may be occurring. There is no letup in manufacturing expansion. Most Banks which reported on this topic found the uptrend noticeable. Cleveland and St. Louis indicate that factories are operating at or near capacity; the former, however, found a modest decline in the proportion of firms reporting new orders in May. Dallas, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, and Richmond reported further gains in manufacturing activity. Atlanta reported that employees were working overtime in lumber, machinery, and metal products. Chicago reported that the uptrend of manufacturers' orders may be slowing because of reluctance to take new orders many months ahead at stated prices.  Shortages and rationing continue to be major complaints in many product lines. Seven of the Reserve Banks reported either raw materials or manufactured products of some type in short supply. Items reported in short supply include: labor, gasoline, natural gas, paper, paperboard, transportation facilities, cement, fertilizer and other agricultural supplies, and electric power. The shortages are apparently leading to a capital spending ""boom."" The impending plant expansions in the Sixth District include a wide range of the major industries of the nation. Cleveland respondents representing steel and other industries reported that capital spending to expand capacity is underway and that no plans exist for cutting back in 1974 as long as new orders and profits warrant the expenditures.  A high level of capital investment in plant and equipment was indicated by Dallas and San Francisco, and plant capacity is reported to be inadequate to meet expected future sales in a number of other Districts. The reports indicate that inflation is still a major concern of businessmen, and there is little optimism that it will come to an early end. Chicago reported an acceleration in the number of announced price increases in June. Dallas Directors expect wage rates in their companies to rise at a 7 percent rate in the second half of the year. Philadelphia respondents report higher prices for raw materials, and over half of the area's executives expect a worsening of the situation. New York Directors expect further price increases over the coming months, but at a more moderate rate. New York expressed the view that the increased food prices may have a strong impact on union wage demands.     Residential construction has apparently turned down in most of the Districts. Chicago reported that a decline in residential construction is clearly underway. Other Districts reporting either a slowdown or weakness in such activity include: Atlanta, Cleveland, Dallas and San Francisco. Only Richmond reported further increases in home building. The trend in commercial construction is mixed. Employment has leveled off in most of the Districts and unemployment has inched up, but most of the Banks still report a ""tight"" labor market and labor shortages, especially of skilled labor. The nation's agricultural situation has vastly improved in recent weeks. After an extremely difficult planting season because of wet weather and floods, prospects are now good for a large production of critical food and feed crops. Some shortages in seed and fertilizer still exist in limited areas and some land along the Mississippi River may not dry in time to plant cotton, the intended crop, which will be critical to individual cotton farmers. Farm production costs are high and rising, but overall prospects are for high farm incomes. If average growing conditions are realized, record levels of production are likely for a number of major crops and record prices may be received for them. In the meantime, however, as reported by Chicago and Kansas City, prices of meat animals may be pressing against the ceilings, and rising feed costs are reducing profit levels from feeding. The ceilings could thus result in lower levels of production. Most Districts reported a strong loan demand, slower deposit growth, and generally higher interest rates than heretofore. Regular business customers are apparently having no trouble obtaining credit at the higher rates, but Chicago reports that country elevators are having increased financing difficulties as a result of transportation problems and sizable margin calls on hedged grain. In response to the Board's request for information on the impact of the Treasury's tax proposals for eliminating real estate tax shelters, the replies varied from little or no impact on construction activity to   a definite dampening effect. Boston, after a study in some depth, concluded that subsidized housing would be severely hurt, and that while profits in the private market would be reduced, most ""worthwhile"" projects would be built. A decline in construction would be anticipated in the Kansas City and Minneapolis Districts. Kansas City reported that the healthy business situation in the Tenth District would be dealt a severe blow if investment funds flowing into cattle and construction were suddenly cut back by tax reform. The respondents indicate that the tax would not have a significant impact on construction in the Chicago,  New York, Richmond, and St. Louis Districts."
1973-07-11,national,overall,"Economic activity remains strong across the nation. Consumer spending is consistently described as continuing to grow in each District. A high level of activity is also reported in most manufacturing areas, as order backlogs keep production at full capacity in most industries. In spite of some signs of weakness, construction is maintaining current volume and in some Districts, it is expanding. The principal economic problem concerns stabilization policy, and in particular, the price freeze. The price freeze is causing major dislocations in agricultural processing. At the moment, the effects in other sectors such as manufacturing and retailing are limited, yet some inequities are appearing which would become serious if the freeze should continue beyond 60 days. Credit conditions remain tight as banks face very strong loan demand. Economic activity remains strong across the nation. Consumer spending is consistently described as continuing to grow in each District. A high level of activity is also reported in most manufacturing areas, as order backlogs keep production at full capacity in most industries. In spite of some signs of weakness, construction is maintaining current volume and in some Districts, it is expanding. The principal economic problem concerns stabilization policy, and in particular, the price freeze. The price freeze is causing major dislocations in agricultural processing. At the moment, the effects in other sectors such as manufacturing and retailing are limited, yet some inequities are appearing which would become serious if the freeze should continue beyond 60 days. Credit conditions remain tight as banks face very strong loan demand. Consumer spending is showing no sign of slowing. In part this is attributed to expectations of higher prices. Heavy purchases of durables are reported by retailers in the Minneapolis and San Francisco Districts. Automobile dealers are also experiencing excellent sales, particularly in the Dallas and Atlanta Districts. In Minneapolis, Richmond and Cleveland, a shift is noted toward smaller cars, and this is thought to be a reaction to prospective gasoline shortages. Manufacturing activity is pressing against capacity in most Districts, and order backlogs show no sign of shortening. Shortages of many materials are developing, and according to the Cleveland and St. Louis Banks, they are beginning to affect production adversely. Chicago reports shortages in steel, castings, chemicals, and many other products; furthermore, delivery dependability and product quality have deteriorated. Farm equipment and parts are also in short supply in several Districts. Construction, despite some expectations of slowing later this year, is at high levels in most Districts. Residential construction contracts increased in the Dallas and Richmond Districts, but Atlanta and San Francisco report forecasts of a construction slowdown later this year. Gasoline shortages are affecting tourism in such Districts as Kansas City and Minneapolis. In other Districts, shortages are not as severe, but the problem is causing some uncertainty and it is reducing demand for such products as recreational vehicles. Dallas reports its District refineries are turning out record amounts of gasoline; both Dallas and Chicago indicate, although there may be localized distribution problems, the shortage is not as severe as expected. Despite a high level of activity, more concern is reported about prospective economic conditions in Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta. In contrast, the Chicago Bank describes local businessmen and bankers as seeing no sign of any downward trend. In other areas, the evidence is mixed; industrial equipment lines are at capacity in the Boston District, but orders for consumer goods are slackening. Inventories are variously reported unchanged in New York, lower in Richmond, and up in Philadelphia. In the St. Louis District, many industries are expanding production facilities, but in the Philadelphia area more firms are now expecting to decrease their capital expenditures. Directors in several Districts are expressing concern over the direction of economic policy. Most feel that more emphasis should be given to fiscal policy. Reports for all Districts indicate various degrees of hostility to the present price freeze, ranging from belief that it is ill conceived to the opinion that it is disastrous. The common conclusion is that the freeze cannot be continued beyond the planned 60 days without serious problems developing. The most serious consequences are now felt in agriculture and associated food-processing industries. The price freeze is cutting into livestock and poultry production. Feedlot operators and poultry producers are being squeezed by higher feed grain prices and fixed wholesale prices which do not cover costs. Food and grain processors in the Chicago, Richmond, Kansas City and San Francisco Districts have cut back or closed operations. Egg and milk production is expected to fall. Both St. Louis and Dallas forecast reduced beef supplies this fall as a result of the freeze. In nonagricultural industry, the price freeze is beginning to cause dislocations. New York, Dallas and Chicago describe shortages caused by imports being hampered by low domestic prices. Some suppliers, according to the New York Bank, are exporting to obtain higher external prices and thus not filling domestic orders. Chicago lists a large number of devices that are beginning to be used by suppliers to evade price ceilings. Banks in all Districts report strong loan demand. Real estate loans, in particular, are being restricted or tied to higher down payments. Kansas City banks report that the recent increases in prime rate are not discouraging business borrowing."
1973-08-10,national,overall,"The overall impression conveyed by the District Banks' August Red Book reports is that business activity continues at a high level, but with some scattered indications of a tapering off in the rate of growth. Most Banks report a sustained high level of consumer spending, in part related to expectations of further price increases, but respondents in several Districts looked for a cooling off of consumer demand over the coming months. Business plant and equipment outlays remain at a high level, largely undeterred by the high cost of credit, and the demand for agricultural machinery is recording a sharp rise. However, shortages of raw materials, energy, and trained labor were frequently cited as possibly inhibiting further expansion in capital goods output and production generally. Moreover, private residential construction is generally reported on the decline, in good part because of the high cost and unavailability of mortgage funds, in turn traceable to the net outflow of deposits at thrift institutions. Commercial and nonbuilding construction has been faring better, although some reports indicate a tapering off in this sector. Against this background, there appears to have been little net change in the nationwide industrial production and employment situation. Crops are expected to be at, or near, record levels in most agricultural areas. Most Districts in varying degree reported dissatisfaction on the part of business over Phase IV, and controls generally. Continued strong loan demand was noted in most reports. The overall impression conveyed by the District Banks' August Red Book reports is that business activity continues at a high level, but with some scattered indications of a tapering off in the rate of growth. Most Banks report a sustained high level of consumer spending, in part related to expectations of further price increases, but respondents in several Districts looked for a cooling off of consumer demand over the coming months. Business plant and equipment outlays remain at a high level, largely undeterred by the high cost of credit, and the demand for agricultural machinery is recording a sharp rise. However, shortages of raw materials, energy, and trained labor were frequently cited as possibly inhibiting further expansion in capital goods output and production generally. Moreover, private residential construction is generally reported on the decline, in good part because of the high cost and unavailability of mortgage funds, in turn traceable to the net outflow of deposits at thrift institutions. Commercial and nonbuilding construction has been faring better, although some reports indicate a tapering off in this sector. Against this background, there appears to have been little net change in the nationwide industrial production and employment situation. Crops are expected to be at, or near, record levels in most agricultural areas. Most Districts in varying degree reported dissatisfaction on the part of business over Phase IV, and controls generally. Continued strong loan demand was noted in most reports. San Francisco reports that consumer spending is clearly the leading sector in all areas of the District, in part reflecting anticipations of further price increases—a factor also mentioned by Minneapolis. St. Louis reports that consumer outlays are continuing to trend upward, and Chicago notes that sales of major appliances have surged since mid-June. Major retailers in the Richmond District, however, have found that while sales have continued to improve, the rate of growth has tapered off during the past month. A large nationwide retail firm headquartered in the Cleveland District, moreover, looks for an appreciable decline in the rate of expansion in consumer spending over the year ahead. Retailers in Minnesota, on the other hand, are reported to expect no slowdown in their sales growth during the remainder of 1973. The reports generally also point to a sustained high level of business plant and equipment outlays. Philadelphia thus reports that almost 45 percent of the manufacturers surveyed planned to increase capital investment in the six months ahead, while Cleveland and Boston report receipt by firms in their Districts of large capital goods orders. Chicago reports that business borrowers have shown little reluctance to borrow at the currently high level of interest rates and that a number of industries are moving vigorously to expand basic capacity. Atlanta lists a sizable number of large new plant announcements. A similar picture emerges from most other reports. However, a number of Banks—including Chicago, Cleveland, and New York—cite the growing list of shortages of raw materials and trained personnel as adversely affecting both capital goods and consumer products output. Regarding construction activity, most of the Banks report an actual or prospective decline in private residential construction, reflecting the net outflow of funds from thrift institutions and the accompanying dearth and high cost of mortgage funds. Commercial and nonbuilding construction, however, with scattered exceptions, was generally reported to be holding up well. A bright picture emerged from reports from agricultural areas. Kansas City thus expects a record wheat crop while Atlanta reports a record citrus fruit crop. Dallas, San Francisco, St. Louis and Richmond all anticipate above average or good to excellent agricultural production. Much criticism, however, was expressed over the continued ""freeze"" on beef prices. More generally, a great deal of skepticism regarding the effectiveness of Phase IV in coping with inflation, and hostility on the part of businessmen toward the controls, was expressed by respondents in many Districts."
1973-09-12,national,overall,"Reports of sustained current strength continue to coexist with expectations of a future slowdown. Consumer spending and the demand for consumer loans have maintained their recent pace of growth. Business investment and foreign demand are buoyant and are expected to remain strong into the future. Only residential construction has weakened, though business and public construction has partly offset housing declines. Shortages of material, skilled labor, and mortgage funds are widespread. The unavailability of some materials is traced to the economic controls program. Small changes in employment have occurred. With a few exceptions, business loan demand has strengthened. With thrift institutions experiencing deposit losses, some loans have been made to nonbank intermediaries. Despite damages due to Delia and drought, agricultural output, prices, and income are reported to be high. Greater stability in food prices is expected in the future. Reports of sustained current strength continue to coexist with expectations of a future slowdown. Consumer spending and the demand for consumer loans have maintained their recent pace of growth. Business investment and foreign demand are buoyant and are expected to remain strong into the future. Only residential construction has weakened, though business and public construction has partly offset housing declines. Shortages of material, skilled labor, and mortgage funds are widespread. The unavailability of some materials is traced to the economic controls program. Small changes in employment have occurred. With a few exceptions, business loan demand has strengthened. With thrift institutions experiencing deposit losses, some loans have been made to nonbank intermediaries. Despite damages due to Delia and drought, agricultural output, prices, and income are reported to be high. Greater stability in food prices is expected in the future. With the exception of large automobiles, consumer demand has been brisk in most Districts. Minneapolis and Atlanta report that controls have not produced the feared curtailment of planned business investment, but St. Louis and Chicago suggest controls may be hampering capacity expansion in sectors such as the paper industry. San Francisco and Kansas City report inventories generally below desired levels but reports from the Richmond, Philadelphia, and Cleveland Banks do not expect major inventory buildups in the future. The Cleveland and Chicago Districts have experienced intense foreign demand for steel and many ""bargain"" U. S. materials. Lack of mortgage funds has reduced residential construction activity in most Districts. Shortages are reported by the New York, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis and Kansas City Banks. In the Kansas City District, lead times are considerably above normal, and lengthening. In St. Louis, manufacturing is at or near its capacity levels. Chicago, which has been experiencing strong demand for a wide variety of goods, indicates that price controls have restricted the supply of petroleum and paper products. Atlanta reports that material shortages have led to plant closings. New York has experienced shortages of skilled labor. In Chicago and Atlanta, the labor shortage includes unskilled labor as well. Nevertheless, most Districts reported only minor gains in employment. A near-term slowdown is expected by the directors and businessmen in the Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, and Minneapolis Districts. A Boston director notes a convergence of opinions on the economic outlook very close to the consensus view of the business economists in the Fourth District--a ""growth"" but not ""classical"" recession. New orders have started to level off in the Philadelphia and Richmond Districts, though they continue to rise in other areas. According to the reports from New York, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, the tapering will center in the consumer spending area. The outlook for agricultural incomes and crops, particularly soybeans, remains good. Drought in the West and tropical storm Delia in the Gulf have destroyed some of the wheat, rice, cotton, and soybean crops. High poultry prices have stimulated supply in the Southeast. The Dallas Bank notes that the number of cattle and calves on feed in the Southwest was down from July but well above last year. Cattle placements and slaughter were, however, down from last month and last year. The Kansas City Bank indicates that ""on balance, food prices should tend to stabilize in coming months, but hoped-for declines of a significant magnitude are still sometime off."" Business loan demand was strong in most districts. Both Dallas and Kansas City, however, report some decreases. The pace of disintermediation is widely reported to have accelerated in August. Except in St. Louis, where most prospective home purchasers can obtain mortgage credit, mortgage availability and terms have become increasingly stringent."
1973-10-10,national,overall,"The Redbook reports describe a very strong economy with widespread shortages of manpower and materials and substantial upward pressures on prices. Disintermediation at S&Ls, usury rates, and generally tight money have drastically reduced the availability of mortgage funds, with the result that residential building activity is shrinking rapidly throughout the nation. Virtually all other major sectors, including nonresidential construction, remain vigorous with rising backlogs and stretching lead times on deliveries. Inventories of goods, especially raw materials, are lower than desired in most sectors. A wide range of materials and components are in critically short supply. As a result, expansion of output has been dampened and, in some cases, output has been curtailed. Investments in plant and equipment in virtually all industries are rising, and this trend is expected to continue well into 1974. Prospects for crops are generally very favorable. Reports on retail trade were mixed and inconclusive. Reports on credit demands also were mixed, but it is apparent that lenders have no difficulty finding profitable outlets for available funds.Selected highlights of reports from each of the districts follows. Comments on the universally bleak residential construction picture are omitted.
Boston: Sales and orders of capital goods continue to rise at a rapid pace, but orders for consumer goods are ""a little slower."" Unemployment remains relatively high. Domestic capital goods orders are particularly vigorous for chemical processing equipment, machine tools, and aerospace. Foreign orders for capital goods are large. Views of four academic correspondents are presented.
New York: Demand for materials and goods remains strong, but slower growth in overall activity is expected. Phase IV is termed a ""disaster."" Higher prices abroad are drawing away U. S. resources. Labor's wage demands are viewed as under ""restraint."" Scarcities have hampered attempts to build inventories of raw materials.
Philadelphia: Plant and equipment investment plans have been raised. Employment is rising slowly and workweeks are lengthening. Delivery lead times have stretched out.
Cleveland: Shortages are ""constraining"" growth in output, and are judged to be the main cause of the recent slowing in the rise in general activity. Moreover, shortages have become more severe in recent weeks. Glass production lines have been shut down for lack of soda ash and increased supplies are a year or more away. Shortages of plastic materials are cutting production of various products. Foreign prices for plastic materials and for steel are well above U.S. prices. Most steel order books have been closed for the year. Inventories are low generally. Some retailers report slower sales. Labor turnover is high. Some firms are hoarding fuel.
Richmond: Business activity continues to expand despite shortages of labor and materials. Paper, synthetic fibers, and chemicals are especially strong. Electrical components are in short supply. Phase IV is criticized. Retail sales remain strong. Nonresidential construction has been maintained. Volvo will locate a plant in Virginia.
Atlanta: Only residential construction is down. Shortages have delayed construction projects. Commercial construction plans announced for the Atlanta area ""dazzle the imagination."" Industrial projects are being pushed in various parts of the South, and Japanese and European manufacturers are evaluating sites for new plants in the region. Shipyards are being expanded to handle the boom in tankers and bulk cargo carriers. Labor shortages are limiting phosphate mining. Shortages of shrimp and oysters are reported.
Chicago: Supplies of a broad range of basic materials are very tight with no improvement expected in the foreseeable future. Motor vehicle output has been limited by strikes and availability of components. Labor supplies are inadequate, both for skilled and trainable workers. Nonresidential construction has been delayed by shortages of materials. Shortages of steel, nonferrous metals, paper, fuels, chemicals, and plastics are holding down production of finished goods. New labor contracts may be more generous than suggested by announced increases in basic wages. Record crops of corn and soybeans are anticipated.
St. Louis: Widespread shortages of raw materials are hampering output. Plants producing garments, appliances, and hardware are at capacity. Many firms report labor shortages, and unemployment is low. Crop conditions are ""good to excellent.""
Minneapolis: Retail sales have ""not yet let up"" and further gains are expected. The outlook is for record crops. Shortages of materials, e.g., steel and plastics, are holding down output. The fertilizer shortage is ""critical."" Shortages of general laborers as well as skilled workers are reported, and labor turnover has increased.
Kansas City: Recent floods have damaged property and delayed planting of winter wheat, but the overall impact probably will be ""rather insignificant."" Propane supplies needed to dry crops may not be adequate. Auto sales are very good, especially sales of compacts. Department store sales are strong. Lead times on consumer goods orders are long, but retail inventories are ""as budgeted.""
Dallas: Employment reached a new high in August. Department store sales increased ""rapidly"" in September. The CLC's ""two-tier"" system has allowed prices of ""new"" crude to rise substantially above prices of ""old"" crude. Imported crude is high-priced. Fertilizer supplies are limited. Crops are generally ""good to excellent"" except for a large decline in rice yields.
San Francisco: Housing is the only sector showing a decline. Both business and consumer spending remain strong. Investments by electronics, fertilizer, and chemicals firms are at high levels. Boeing has received additional orders. Farmers are spending freely. Power shortages have caused cutbacks in usage in Oregon. The housing decline has reduced demand for lumber and cement. Drought cut wheat output in the Northwest.
 The Redbook reports describe a very strong economy with widespread shortages of manpower and materials and substantial upward pressures on prices. Disintermediation at S&Ls, usury rates, and generally tight money have drastically reduced the availability of mortgage funds, with the result that residential building activity is shrinking rapidly throughout the nation. Virtually all other major sectors, including nonresidential construction, remain vigorous with rising backlogs and stretching lead times on deliveries. Inventories of goods, especially raw materials, are lower than desired in most sectors. A wide range of materials and components are in critically short supply. As a result, expansion of output has been dampened and, in some cases, output has been curtailed. Investments in plant and equipment in virtually all industries are rising, and this trend is expected to continue well into 1974. Prospects for crops are generally very favorable. Reports on retail trade were mixed and inconclusive. Reports on credit demands also were mixed, but it is apparent that lenders have no difficulty finding profitable outlets for available funds.Selected highlights of reports from each of the districts follows. Comments on the universally bleak residential construction picture are omitted.
Boston: Sales and orders of capital goods continue to rise at a rapid pace, but orders for consumer goods are ""a little slower."" Unemployment remains relatively high. Domestic capital goods orders are particularly vigorous for chemical processing equipment, machine tools, and aerospace. Foreign orders for capital goods are large. Views of four academic correspondents are presented.
New York: Demand for materials and goods remains strong, but slower growth in overall activity is expected. Phase IV is termed a ""disaster."" Higher prices abroad are drawing away U. S. resources. Labor's wage demands are viewed as under ""restraint."" Scarcities have hampered attempts to build inventories of raw materials.
Philadelphia: Plant and equipment investment plans have been raised. Employment is rising slowly and workweeks are lengthening. Delivery lead times have stretched out.
Cleveland: Shortages are ""constraining"" growth in output, and are judged to be the main cause of the recent slowing in the rise in general activity. Moreover, shortages have become more severe in recent weeks. Glass production lines have been shut down for lack of soda ash and increased supplies are a year or more away. Shortages of plastic materials are cutting production of various products. Foreign prices for plastic materials and for steel are well above U.S. prices. Most steel order books have been closed for the year. Inventories are low generally. Some retailers report slower sales. Labor turnover is high. Some firms are hoarding fuel.
Richmond: Business activity continues to expand despite shortages of labor and materials. Paper, synthetic fibers, and chemicals are especially strong. Electrical components are in short supply. Phase IV is criticized. Retail sales remain strong. Nonresidential construction has been maintained. Volvo will locate a plant in Virginia.
Atlanta: Only residential construction is down. Shortages have delayed construction projects. Commercial construction plans announced for the Atlanta area ""dazzle the imagination."" Industrial projects are being pushed in various parts of the South, and Japanese and European manufacturers are evaluating sites for new plants in the region. Shipyards are being expanded to handle the boom in tankers and bulk cargo carriers. Labor shortages are limiting phosphate mining. Shortages of shrimp and oysters are reported.
Chicago: Supplies of a broad range of basic materials are very tight with no improvement expected in the foreseeable future. Motor vehicle output has been limited by strikes and availability of components. Labor supplies are inadequate, both for skilled and trainable workers. Nonresidential construction has been delayed by shortages of materials. Shortages of steel, nonferrous metals, paper, fuels, chemicals, and plastics are holding down production of finished goods. New labor contracts may be more generous than suggested by announced increases in basic wages. Record crops of corn and soybeans are anticipated.
St. Louis: Widespread shortages of raw materials are hampering output. Plants producing garments, appliances, and hardware are at capacity. Many firms report labor shortages, and unemployment is low. Crop conditions are ""good to excellent.""
Minneapolis: Retail sales have ""not yet let up"" and further gains are expected. The outlook is for record crops. Shortages of materials, e.g., steel and plastics, are holding down output. The fertilizer shortage is ""critical."" Shortages of general laborers as well as skilled workers are reported, and labor turnover has increased.
Kansas City: Recent floods have damaged property and delayed planting of winter wheat, but the overall impact probably will be ""rather insignificant."" Propane supplies needed to dry crops may not be adequate. Auto sales are very good, especially sales of compacts. Department store sales are strong. Lead times on consumer goods orders are long, but retail inventories are ""as budgeted.""
Dallas: Employment reached a new high in August. Department store sales increased ""rapidly"" in September. The CLC's ""two-tier"" system has allowed prices of ""new"" crude to rise substantially above prices of ""old"" crude. Imported crude is high-priced. Fertilizer supplies are limited. Crops are generally ""good to excellent"" except for a large decline in rice yields.
San Francisco: Housing is the only sector showing a decline. Both business and consumer spending remain strong. Investments by electronics, fertilizer, and chemicals firms are at high levels. Boeing has received additional orders. Farmers are spending freely. Power shortages have caused cutbacks in usage in Oregon. The housing decline has reduced demand for lumber and cement. Drought cut wheat output in the Northwest.
 Selected highlights of reports from each of the districts follows. Comments on the universally bleak residential construction picture are omitted. Boston: Sales and orders of capital goods continue to rise at a rapid pace, but orders for consumer goods are ""a little slower."" Unemployment remains relatively high. Domestic capital goods orders are particularly vigorous for chemical processing equipment, machine tools, and aerospace. Foreign orders for capital goods are large. Views of four academic correspondents are presented. New York: Demand for materials and goods remains strong, but slower growth in overall activity is expected. Phase IV is termed a ""disaster."" Higher prices abroad are drawing away U. S. resources. Labor's wage demands are viewed as under ""restraint."" Scarcities have hampered attempts to build inventories of raw materials. Philadelphia: Plant and equipment investment plans have been raised. Employment is rising slowly and workweeks are lengthening. Delivery lead times have stretched out. Cleveland: Shortages are ""constraining"" growth in output, and are judged to be the main cause of the recent slowing in the rise in general activity. Moreover, shortages have become more severe in recent weeks. Glass production lines have been shut down for lack of soda ash and increased supplies are a year or more away. Shortages of plastic materials are cutting production of various products. Foreign prices for plastic materials and for steel are well above U.S. prices. Most steel order books have been closed for the year. Inventories are low generally. Some retailers report slower sales. Labor turnover is high. Some firms are hoarding fuel. Richmond: Business activity continues to expand despite shortages of labor and materials. Paper, synthetic fibers, and chemicals are especially strong. Electrical components are in short supply. Phase IV is criticized. Retail sales remain strong. Nonresidential construction has been maintained. Volvo will locate a plant in Virginia. Atlanta: Only residential construction is down. Shortages have delayed construction projects. Commercial construction plans announced for the Atlanta area ""dazzle the imagination."" Industrial projects are being pushed in various parts of the South, and Japanese and European manufacturers are evaluating sites for new plants in the region. Shipyards are being expanded to handle the boom in tankers and bulk cargo carriers. Labor shortages are limiting phosphate mining. Shortages of shrimp and oysters are reported. Chicago: Supplies of a broad range of basic materials are very tight with no improvement expected in the foreseeable future. Motor vehicle output has been limited by strikes and availability of components. Labor supplies are inadequate, both for skilled and trainable workers. Nonresidential construction has been delayed by shortages of materials. Shortages of steel, nonferrous metals, paper, fuels, chemicals, and plastics are holding down production of finished goods. New labor contracts may be more generous than suggested by announced increases in basic wages. Record crops of corn and soybeans are anticipated. St. Louis: Widespread shortages of raw materials are hampering output. Plants producing garments, appliances, and hardware are at capacity. Many firms report labor shortages, and unemployment is low. Crop conditions are ""good to excellent."" Minneapolis: Retail sales have ""not yet let up"" and further gains are expected. The outlook is for record crops. Shortages of materials, e.g., steel and plastics, are holding down output. The fertilizer shortage is ""critical."" Shortages of general laborers as well as skilled workers are reported, and labor turnover has increased. Kansas City: Recent floods have damaged property and delayed planting of winter wheat, but the overall impact probably will be ""rather insignificant."" Propane supplies needed to dry crops may not be adequate. Auto sales are very good, especially sales of compacts. Department store sales are strong. Lead times on consumer goods orders are long, but retail inventories are ""as budgeted."" Dallas: Employment reached a new high in August. Department store sales increased ""rapidly"" in September. The CLC's ""two-tier"" system has allowed prices of ""new"" crude to rise substantially above prices of ""old"" crude. Imported crude is high-priced. Fertilizer supplies are limited. Crops are generally ""good to excellent"" except for a large decline in rice yields. San Francisco: Housing is the only sector showing a decline. Both business and consumer spending remain strong. Investments by electronics, fertilizer, and chemicals firms are at high levels. Boeing has received additional orders. Farmers are spending freely. Power shortages have caused cutbacks in usage in Oregon. The housing decline has reduced demand for lumber and cement. Drought cut wheat output in the Northwest."
1973-11-14,national,overall,"While the reports of the Federal Reserve Banks indicate that the pace of economic activity may have slowed somewhat in recent weeks, the current situation is highlighted by growing demand pressures, material shortages, problems of inadequate capacity, and increased rationing of raw and semi-finished products by the private sector. In the agricultural sector, large crops and increased food supplies are in prospect. While the reports of the Federal Reserve Banks indicate that the pace of economic activity may have slowed somewhat in recent weeks, the current situation is highlighted by growing demand pressures, material shortages, problems of inadequate capacity, and increased rationing of raw and semi-finished products by the private sector. In the agricultural sector, large crops and increased food supplies are in prospect. The energy crisis is a topic of prime concern to businessmen throughout the country. Several Reserve Banks report business slowdowns in their Districts resulting from fuel shortages, and respondents in many Districts fear that layoffs of workers will worsen. Dallas reports that oil production in Texas is falling and that present stocks of oil in that state are only sufficient to last through the first severe cold spell. Diesel fuel shortages are being felt in some areas. Atlanta reports that a recent cutback in diesel fuel allotments will reduce coal deliveries to TVA, thus contributing to a power shortage. Cleveland reports that the petrochemical and rubber industries are being adversely affected by lack of oil and that steel production may be curtailed in the months ahead. Chicago reports that industrial users of natural gas and propane may be cut off, but major electric utilities in the Seventh District appear to be in a relatively good position because of the use of coal and nuclear energy. In addition to the concern about energy, shortages of other materials are widely reported. New York reports shortages in zinc and copper which approach ""Korean War proportions"". Labor, paper, steel products, and various other raw materials are reported to be in short supply in many areas. An increasing number of firms in the St. Louis District report rationing of a wide variety of raw materials by their suppliers, and Cleveland indicates that a three to six-month delivery period is common for many products. Manufacturing activity continues generally strong, but some Districts report a slowing in the rate of increase. Chicago indicates that lack of supplies and manpower, rather than lack of demand, is responsible for the slowing. Capital goods industries are especially strong, as investment spending continues at a high level. Reports from New York and St. Louis suggest that much of the investment may be for mandatory pollution control equipment rather than for projects which will increase productive capacity, Many investment projects in the Atlanta District are being delayed, largely as a result of shortages. Continued high capital spending in agriculture is projected in the New York District, and Chicago reports that farm equipment firms are ""swamped"" by orders. Retail sales generally continue at high levels, although some of the Federal Reserve Banks indicate a slowing in consumer demand. This was noted particularly for automobiles and consumer durables. Employment generally continues at high levels, with many Districts reporting labor shortages. For example, Dallas reports a sharp rise in employment in recent months, led by increases in construction and government employment; unemployment in the Dallas District remains around 4 percent. By contrast, Boston describes the New England employment picture as ""bleak"", with September unemployment about 6-1/2 percent in the region and 7-1/2 percent in Massachusetts. The agricultural situation is good with high crop yields and large farm incomes in prospect. Many Districts report that crop harvesting is progressing rapidly. Livestock production in the Dallas District is slightly higher than last year, and the Florida citrus crop is the second largest on record. Chicago reports that, in the last year, value of farmland has experienced the largest increase in 20 years. Construction activity is down in many areas, but commercial construction has held up better than residential. A number of the Federal Reserve Banks reported that construction is being retarded by material shortages, late deliveries and uncertainties stemming from rapid price changes. Interest rates have in some cases declined in recent weeks, reflecting a decrease in bank loan demand, especially for commercial loans. Both San Francisco and St. Louis, for example, reported that the lower business loan demand may reflect the substitution of commercial paper for bank loans. Some Reserve Banks report increased availability of mortgage funds, but the movement in mortgage rates is apparently mixed. Usury laws in some states have tended to limit the supply of mortgage funds. Chicago reports that the 8 percent usury law in Illinois continues to limit new loans. New York reports an increase in the supply of mortgage funds resulting from the raising of the state usury ceiling from 8 to 8-1/2 percent."
1973-12-12,national,overall,"Energy shortages are beginning to cause considerable concern, but as yet the pace of economic activity continues to be strong. Retailers in most Districts anticipate good Christmas sales, and agricultural earnings continue to climb. Capital expenditures are another source of strength, and although considerable variation is reported for business investment plans for 1974, the prospects are that capital spending will remain high. Weaknesses are most apparent in residential housing and automobile sales. Energy shortages are beginning to cause considerable concern, but as yet the pace of economic activity continues to be strong. Retailers in most Districts anticipate good Christmas sales, and agricultural earnings continue to climb. Capital expenditures are another source of strength, and although considerable variation is reported for business investment plans for 1974, the prospects are that capital spending will remain high. Weaknesses are most apparent in residential housing and automobile sales. The impact of petroleum shortages varies considerably from region to region, and from industry to industry. The prospective gasoline shortages are one cause of reduced demand for regular-size domestic automobiles which has resulted in layoffs in several Districts (Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City and San Francisco). Sales of compact cars are excellent, and so, interestingly enough, are sales of luxury cars. Diesel fuel, in particular, appears to be in short supply and black markets for this fuel are reported to be developing in some areas. Other industries affected include petrochemical-based plastics, manufacturers of recreational vehicles, and plywood mills. Airlines are laying off employees in several Districts, and tourism-related manufacturers are being hurt according to reports from Minneapolis, Kansas City and San Francisco. Atlanta, in contrast, notes optimism about Florida's tourist business. Shortages of natural gas are causing problems for the manufacturers who are forced to cut production or shift to high-priced fuels such as propane. Electrical shortages are not prevalent. New England, whose utilities rely relatively heavily on residual oil, appears to face the most serious problems and may have power blackouts this winter. In other areas, conditions have improved. The Pacific Northwest's power shortage has been relieved by heavy rainfall in November. The view expressed in most Districts is that the uncertainty caused by the energy shortages is disrupting transportation and causing shortages. This is likely to slow economic activity in 1974. However, there is considerable variation in opinions as to the net impact. Some respondents do not think that the shortages will be so severe as to cut into expected capital expenditures or to cause serious layoffs, but others think a serious recession is likely. Directors in the Boston District seem to be most pessimistic in this regard. As to the proper government response, opinion is divided between those favoring rationing and those wishing to rely upon voluntary reductions. In the St. Louis District, there is less concern about energy shortages and more concern about inflation and the effects of government price controls as a factor causing materials shortages. Similar views are noted by Cleveland. Chicago, Philadelphia and New York Districts report little change in current investment plans. For example, Chicago describes capital goods manufacturers as being overwhelmed by orders, but St. Louis reports reductions in investment plans. Although there is some reluctance to project trends, there is considerable support for expecting continued heavy investment expenditures. Retail sales in most Districts are equal to or exceed last year's levels but retailers are more uncertain about 1974 and are more cautious about their spring orders. A survey by Richmond indicates 70 percent of its respondents expect a lower rate of economic activity. High agricultural income is stimulating the heavy expenditures by farmers. Dallas reports harvests and plantings equal to or exceeding last year's schedule for all crops. On the other hand, cattlemen are more uncertain about beef markets. Prices have declined and supplies of beef for slaughter are abundant. Residential construction is continuing to fall off and it is only being partially offset by commercial construction. Increases in flow of mortgage funds, reported in several Districts, may help but the prospect is for a continued decline. Dallas reports that oil drilling has responded strongly to the incentives of higher prices and is at the maximum level for the existing availability of crews and rigs. But production from Texas fields is expected to decline because these fields are past their peak in production capacity. In summary, despite local problems the economy is continuing to expand but uncertainty caused by worry about energy shortages may contribute to a revision of spending plans by businesses and consumers."
1974-01-16,national,overall,"Notwithstanding the pervasive concern over the energy situation, District reports on balance point to a sustained high level of industrial activity as strong demand-with the exception of some consumer goods-generally continues in evidence. Weak spots so far by and large have been concentrated in regular or large-sized auto sales, airlines and aircraft manufacturers, residential construction, and, to some extent, recreational business. Largely reflecting developments in these sectors, some softening in the employment picture appears in the offing, though current industrial production and manufacturers orders and backlogs remain at high levels. However, much concern was expressed over the obstacles to further growth presented by the wide variety of growing shortages of materials in addition to petroleum products. Moreover, many respondents felt that the abatement of inflationary pressures was not in the cards for the immediate future. Increasing doldrums in the residential construction industry were also noted in some Districts, primarily as a result of high mortgage rates and the high cost of new housing. Strong demand and high prices were expected to stimulate increased agricultural production in 1974, though such an increase might be inhibited by fuel and fertilizer shortages. Notwithstanding the pervasive concern over the energy situation, District reports on balance point to a sustained high level of industrial activity as strong demand-with the exception of some consumer goods-generally continues in evidence. Weak spots so far by and large have been concentrated in regular or large-sized auto sales, airlines and aircraft manufacturers, residential construction, and, to some extent, recreational business. Largely reflecting developments in these sectors, some softening in the employment picture appears in the offing, though current industrial production and manufacturers orders and backlogs remain at high levels. However, much concern was expressed over the obstacles to further growth presented by the wide variety of growing shortages of materials in addition to petroleum products. Moreover, many respondents felt that the abatement of inflationary pressures was not in the cards for the immediate future. Increasing doldrums in the residential construction industry were also noted in some Districts, primarily as a result of high mortgage rates and the high cost of new housing. Strong demand and high prices were expected to stimulate increased agricultural production in 1974, though such an increase might be inhibited by fuel and fertilizer shortages. District respondents generally continued to express serious concern over the potentially adverse effects of the anticipated energy shortage and the rise in oil prices. However, the main thrust of the ""energy crisis"" in terms of output and employment so far appears to have been concentrated on a relatively few, albeit significant, economic sectors, in particular, according to the District reports, the automobile and related industries, airlines and the aircraft industry, and in some areas tourism. The plastics and petrochemical industries have also suffered from shortages of raw materials. However, as noted by Boston, growing shortages of supplies other than petroleum products appear more critical at this time to current production, leading to accumulation at manufacturers of virtually completed products, ranging from aircraft to ovens, for want of a few parts. Indeed, concern over such shortages is mentioned in virtually all District reports. Thus, Chicago succinctly sums up the situation as one where so many different materials and components are in short supply that a list could be constructed almost at random, with shortages of castings, forgings, bearings, steel, nonferrous metals, plastics, all fuels, and paper probably being the most prominent. Cleveland also reports that purchasing agents in the Cleveland area find virtually everything they buy in short supply, with increasingly long delivery time, and that the steel industry continues to operate at full capacity despite some cutback in orders from the auto industry. Dallas reports a dearth of drilling rigs, pipes and other products involved in petroleum output, with little or no relief in sight over the next few years. Against this background, there were frequent reports of business efforts to stockpile, of ""double ordering"", and in some instances of budding black markets and of sharp price increases. Despite the uncertainties surrounding fuel and material supplies and the price situation generally, most District reports pointed to a continued strong business plant and equipment picture. Among others, business respondents in the Dallas, St. Louis, and New York Districts indicated they had no intention at this time of changing their current plans for increased capital outlays. Philadelphia reports that many manufacturers in that District expect to increase their capital expenditures in the coming months, and San Francisco notes that capital expenditures remain at a high level, as business continues to modernize or expand capacity to meet expanding demand. Cleveland points to strong new orders for machine tools, and to a high level of backlogs in that industry, while Chicago reports that producers of a wide variety of capital equipment indicate that the very strong demand for such equipment that had prevailed since early 1973 or late 1972 continues unabated. The consumer spending picture is somewhat more mixed, although with the exception of sales of autos-and, in some instances, of other durables-on balance still appears strong. In part, this strength may reflect anticipatory buying, which was mentioned by Cleveland and New York. A number of Districts, including Minneapolis, Chicago, San Francisco, and Richmond, report that retailers have generally enjoyed a high level of sales over the holiday season, in some cases exceeding expectations. Atlanta, however, notes that increased consumer cautiousness may have kept a ""good"" Christmas season from being a ""great"" one, while a mixed consumer spending picture emerges from Cleveland. A slowing down in department store sales of postponable items is mentioned by Philadelphia, while St. Louis also reports a slowdown in consumer purchases, reflecting in part a sharp drop in auto sales, and perhaps the unusually bad weather conditions in that area. Regarding the employment situation, a number of Districts, including San Francisco, Minneapolis, St. Louis, Chicago, Atlanta, and Richmond report some laying off in industries directly affected by the energy crisis—notably in the auto, airline, and aircraft industry-but otherwise in general see little evidence that this trend is becoming more widespread at this time. Manufacturers in the Kansas City District expect employment to hold up well in 1974, but some manufacturers in the Philadelphia District expect laying off workers by next summer."
1974-02-13,national,overall,"District reports describe a generally weakening economy, punctuated by booming conditions in agriculture and the capital goods industries. Shortages of materials are hampering production and leading to some hoarding of supplies. The impact of the truckers' strike in most Districts appears to have been mainly limited to a temporary disruption of livestock marketing and food processing operations. District reports describe a generally weakening economy, punctuated by booming conditions in agriculture and the capital goods industries. Shortages of materials are hampering production and leading to some hoarding of supplies. The impact of the truckers' strike in most Districts appears to have been mainly limited to a temporary disruption of livestock marketing and food processing operations. Economic conditions varied both among and within Districts. Only Richmond concluded that business activity remains ""strong."" Dallas noted a decline in industrial production led by falling refinery runs, while New York, Philadelphia and Atlanta reported their economies as weakening. Chicago described communities dependent on manufacturing of full-sized cars and recreational vehicles as ""economic disaster areas,"" and Atlanta called the motels around Disney World ""ghost towns."" Yet, Atlanta reported brisk announcements of new plants, and Chicago noted that equipment manufacturers are experiencing an ""unparalleled boom"" and that the steel industry was operating at capacity. The general feeling, as noted by the San, Francisco District, was that some sectors and regions continue to exhibit considerable strength, but the overall outlook was cautious. Retail sales in January were described as good and better than anticipated (Philadelphia, Dallas, Richmond and St. Louis), but retailers were reported as still maintaining their conservative sales forecasts for 1974. Only Atlanta reported some weakening in January sales. The truckers' strike may have led to some panic buying (St. Louis, Cleveland), but its major impact in most Districts appears to have been limited to a temporary disruption of livestock marketing and food processing operations (Richmond, Minneapolis, St. Louis and Kansas City). A survey of retail food chains by the Philadelphia Bank found most stores' inventories holding up well as retailers utilized alternate sources and rail transport. Only Cleveland reported that economic activity had been seriously affected, with major disruptions in shipments of steel and other products, leading to sharp increases in unemployment and declines in output. St. Louis also experienced some output losses and layoffs as a result of the strike in the steel and motor vehicle industries. Residential construction activity was described as weak by most Districts with the major factors being high building costs, confusion over the energy situation and high interest costs. A number of Districts, however, reported increased savings inflows. As a result, several Districts expected a pickup in activity in the second half of 1974 (Kansas City, New York, Dallas). The industrial sectors showing the greatest strength were machinery and equipment and basic materials. Capital goods, chemicals, paper and steel industries were described as operating at capacity levels with sizable order backlogs (St. Louis, Cleveland, Chicago, Boston). Chicago reported that equipment producers were experiencing an ""unparalleled boom."" Only Philadelphia and Minneapolis were aware of a ""softening"" of investment plans. Shortages of materials and semi-manufactured goods were of paramount concern, according to all the District reports. New York referred to the ""steady breakdown effect"" on the economy of the energy crisis and growing shortages of materials. Several Districts reported that attempts to stockpile materials were boosting loan demand (Kansas City, Chicago, Boston, St. Louis and Minneapolis). Directors in Boston expressed the belief that shortages have been created by price controls and that producers are shipping goods abroad or are diverting supplies into the most profitable channels."
1974-03-13,national,overall,"District reports continue to suggest that the cross-currents which have characterized the economic outlook in the recent past remained in evidence in early March. While assessments were mixed, the overall impression which emerged was that of a still generally robust economy, with some areas of weakness in business activity. Business demand for plant and equipment continues to show great strength, although output is being hampered by shortages, not only of energy, but of many raw materials and semi-finished products. Consumer demand seems to be holding up well, aside from the well-publicized weakness in large automobile sales, but production of consumer goods also is being hampered by materials shortages. On the other hand, residential construction remains depressed, and a numberof Districts report some rise in unemployment. The demand for bank credit remains mixed.  District reports continue to suggest that the cross-currents which have characterized the economic outlook in the recent past remained in evidence in early March. While assessments were mixed, the overall impression which emerged was that of a still generally robust economy, with some areas of weakness in business activity. Business demand for plant and equipment continues to show great strength, although output is being hampered by shortages, not only of energy, but of many raw materials and semi-finished products. Consumer demand seems to be holding up well, aside from the well-publicized weakness in large automobile sales, but production of consumer goods also is being hampered by materials shortages. On the other hand, residential construction remains depressed, and a numberof Districts report some rise in unemployment. The demand for bank credit remains mixed.  Regarding consumer spending, a decline in automobile sales, and in some instances a weakening of consumer demand for other durable goods, was mentioned by a number of Districts. On the whole, however, retail sales were reported strong by St. Louis and better than expected by New York. Sales were also reported strong in most parts of the Richmond District, although there were indications that business at suburban outlets was adversely affected by the gasoline shortage. Philadelphia reports that sales declined in February but that retailers are cautiously forecasting an improvement in March. Respondents in the Boston District reported production of consumer goods to be slack, partly reflecting reduced demand, but also because of materials shortages. Dallas reported generally strong department store sales, but some weakening at stores specializing in more expensive products, as well as sharply slower unit sales of the more expensive food items, notably meat, at retail food stores. Similarly, Kansas City attributes the recent sharp decline in livestock prices partly to sluggish consumer demand for meat. Several Districts, including Boston, Richmond, and Atlanta, report weaknesses in tourism and recreation related businesses, while Kansas City refers to generally poor power boat sales. In the building sector, residential construction is termed weak by Atlanta, severely depressed by Cleveland, and falling by San Francisco, while Chicago reports that commercial and public construction has been weaker than expected. House-builders in the Dallas District, however, anticipate a strong turnaround in residential construction by midyear, while several Districts, including Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco, characterize industrial construction as strong, reflecting businesses! efforts to expand capacity. Indeed, most Districts paint a strong capital investment picture. Among others, Boston notes that capital goods orders are very strong and backlogs high; 40 percent of the respondents to the Philadelphia survey of manufacturers expect to boost their capital outlays over the next six months. Chicago terms the demand for machinery as intense, while capital goods producers in the Cleveland area are more optimistic over the outlook for 1974 than they were a month ago. Good prospects for agriculture were also generally reported by most Districts in agricultural areas, dimmed somewhat, however, by potential shortages of fertilizers, farm equipment, and fuel. Minneapolis, however, notes that fertilizers may have been stockpiled, that many farmers have tended to overfertilize and if available fertilizer is used more efficiently, crop yields may not be affected. As in previous months, growing shortages of industrial items were also reported by most Districts. Among others, St. Louis mentions that many firms report ""frantic"" searches for raw material. Steel economists in the Cleveland District state that the demand for steel continues to exceed capacity. Chicago and Richmond report the shortage situation to be a major problem. In this context, respondents in the Minneapolis District felt that price and wage controls have contributed to bringing about existing shortages, and should be eliminated. Similar sentiments were expressed by New York respondents. Regarding bank credit developments, Kansas City and Richmond report a strong loan demand, but Philadelphia and St. Louis report a softening of demand while a mixed picture appears to characterize the situation in the Atlanta and San Francisco Districts."
1974-04-10,national,overall,"The general impression conveyed by this month's Red Book is that the worst of the economic slowdown appears to be over, and that the economic outlook has improved. Directors throughout the System, along with other businessmen and bankers, are generally more optimistic (or less pessimistic) than a month or two ago. The improvement in attitudes is widely attributed to the lifting of the oil embargo. Moreover, indications are that business in the energy-affected sectors was not as bad as expected, or at least the declines have bottomed out in areas such as auto sales, tourism, and housing. Retail sales are showing signs of a pickup, while capital spending remains very strong. Severe shortages of materials and long delivery times continue to hamper operations in many industries. Residential construction is characterized as having stopped declining, but no solid upswing is yet in progress. Agricultural prospects are viewed as good in most areas, although shortages of certain production inputs are a problem. In addition, producers of meat animals and poultry are incurring severe losses as a result of recent price declines. Business loan demand has surged in recent weeks. The general impression conveyed by this month's Red Book is that the worst of the economic slowdown appears to be over, and that the economic outlook has improved. Directors throughout the System, along with other businessmen and bankers, are generally more optimistic (or less pessimistic) than a month or two ago. The improvement in attitudes is widely attributed to the lifting of the oil embargo. Moreover, indications are that business in the energy-affected sectors was not as bad as expected, or at least the declines have bottomed out in areas such as auto sales, tourism, and housing. Retail sales are showing signs of a pickup, while capital spending remains very strong. Severe shortages of materials and long delivery times continue to hamper operations in many industries. Residential construction is characterized as having stopped declining, but no solid upswing is yet in progress. Agricultural prospects are viewed as good in most areas, although shortages of certain production inputs are a problem. In addition, producers of meat animals and poultry are incurring severe losses as a result of recent price declines. Business loan demand has surged in recent weeks. In the consumer sector, there are signs that the most depressed areas, such as new cars, large used cars, and spending for tourism and recreation, are beginning to improve. Districts commenting on the auto market indicate that the decline has ended. Auto dealers are becoming more optimistic as sales of luxury-type and large-sized new and used cars show some pickup. Tourism and recreational spending, which had been dampened by the gasoline situation (and poor weather in some ski areas), is beginning to recover. Nonautomotive retail trade is generally described as having been soft during most of the first quarter. Pre-Easter sales, however, appear to be better than expected by retailers in some Districts. Minneapolis attributes good first quarter sales partly to the high level of farm income. On the other hand, Richmond says that consumers are becoming more cautious about discretionary spending, while Cleveland suggests that it is too early to conclude whether a significant pickup in general merchandise trade is underway. Business fixed investment continues to be an important source of strength. Atlanta notes that the volume of plant announcements is once again on the upswing and emphasizes substantial spending for pollution control. Chicago sees no letup in demand for all types of capital goods, and adds that the farm equipment industry will be hard pressed to increase shipments over last year because output is at capacity and finished goods inventories are down sharply. Cleveland also reports across-the-board strength in capital goods, particularly machine tools. St. Louis, San Francisco, and Philadelphia all see signs of further strength in capital spending. Shortages and long delivery time continue to be serious economic problems, although of less importance than inflation. Almost every District's report includes some comment on the difficulties in obtaining materials and parts and, in some cases, skilled labor and transportation. Shortages are affecting not only manufacturing, but also mining, construction, and agriculture. There are scattered indications that selective decontrols have helped alleviate tight supply conditions in certain instances. But in some cases the situation has grown worse. Chicago, Cleveland, and Dallas, for example, all emphasize increasingly tight conditions in the steel industry, partly because of rapidly dwindling coal supplies. Residential construction seems to have bottomed out, but no District reports a solid recovery underway. In fact, there is concern (variously expressed by Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, St. Louis, and San Francisco) that rising interest rates and potential disintermediation may adversely affect the recovery of home-building. St. Louis reports that S&Ls already have begun to lose deposits in significant amounts. In the agricultural sector, prospects for crops are generally good. Dallas, however, notes that the winter wheat crop in Texas has been affected by drought and is expected to be half of last year's harvest. Shortages of agricultural inputs are disrupting production in the Southwest. Chicago and San Francisco also mention problems regarding shortages of inputs such as fertilizer and machinery. Prospects do not appear to be particularly good for cattle, hogs, and poultry. Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and St. Louis each express concern over the cost-price squeeze currently affecting many producers. Sharp losses due to recent price declines in cattle, hogs, and poultry are reducing the incentive of producers to expand their output. In the banking sector, business loan demand has risen sharply in recent weeks. Kansas City and New York attribute some of the strength to borrowing in anticipation of higher prices. New York adds that the recent rise in money market rates has caused a shift from the commercial paper market to bank credit."
1974-05-15,national,overall,"Latest Redbook comment suggests that the recent business slowdown has bottomed out and that the economy may now be in a mild, though fragile, recovery. Heavy demands f or capital goods appear to be the main element undergirding the current level of activity. Fuel shortages are reported to have eased substantially, although shortages of industrial materials, most notably steel, remain a serious constraint on production growth. Reports on consumer spending are spotty, with some Districts reporting retail sales as ""good"" or ""holding up well"" while others note a softening of demand for big-ticket items and a leveling off in sales of nondurables. The housing sector is uniformly described as weak and, in the light of recent interest rate behavior, as likely to weaken further. All Districts report persisting inflationary expectations, which along with recent sharp price increases and fears of acute materials shortages, are causing large demands for inventory financing. Current comment contains many more references than usual to financial stringencies and liquidity problems, in both the business and banking communities. Latest Redbook comment suggests that the recent business slowdown has bottomed out and that the economy may now be in a mild, though fragile, recovery. Heavy demands f or capital goods appear to be the main element undergirding the current level of activity. Fuel shortages are reported to have eased substantially, although shortages of industrial materials, most notably steel, remain a serious constraint on production growth. Reports on consumer spending are spotty, with some Districts reporting retail sales as ""good"" or ""holding up well"" while others note a softening of demand for big-ticket items and a leveling off in sales of nondurables. The housing sector is uniformly described as weak and, in the light of recent interest rate behavior, as likely to weaken further. All Districts report persisting inflationary expectations, which along with recent sharp price increases and fears of acute materials shortages, are causing large demands for inventory financing. Current comment contains many more references than usual to financial stringencies and liquidity problems, in both the business and banking communities. The most bullish area of the economy clearly is the capital goods sector. Chicago reports that the capital goods boom in the Seventh District ""continues at full throttle"" and this theme is echoed in the reports from Cleveland and St. Louis. The New England machine tool industry is also reported as operating at capacity. Materials and other shortages, however, are mentioned as seriously impeding output growth in this sector. Chicago, for example, notes shortages of metals (especially steel), chemicals, packaging materials, components, trained manpower, and transportation as factors limiting output. Output in the Chicago District was also reported to have been hampered by strikes. As regards the consumer sector, several Districts report an improvement in sales of medium-sized and large automobiles, and Chicago notes that automobile firms ""are pressing for delivery of additional steel for large car production which has increased."" Atlanta and Chicago also report increased demand for recreational vehicles. While retail sales are in general characterized as good, some Districts note that price increases account for much, if not most, of the reported gains. Boston, Dallas, Richmond, and St. Louis report a leveling of sales, with the last two indicating a softening of demand for big-ticket items. Reports on inventories suggest efforts in some industries to build stocks of materials as a hedge against both rising prices and future shortages. A Cleveland survey found stocks depleted in some steel, coal, oil, machinery, chemical, and packaging firms, with respondents indicating that they would like to rebuild their inventories. Capital goods producers are said to be unable to build inventories because of heavy demand pressures and shortages of materials and components. Minneapolis reports some involuntary accumulation of goods in process due to materials and component shortages. In some lines, however, reports suggest inventory accumulation may be leveling off. Dallas reports that retail inventories are being held down while Boston and Minneapolis indicate that high interest costs may be discouraging stock building. Also Richmond reports a significant increase in the number of manufacturing respondents indicating general satisfaction with the current level of inventories. Districts reporting on housing indicate continued weakness in this sector, with prospects that the recent sharp run-up in interest rates will pinch off any recovery that may have been underway. Most Districts report extremely tight mortgage market conditions, with six Reserve Banks reporting a significant amount of disintermediation at either thrift institutions or commercial banks or both. New York characterizes the disintermediation at Second District thrift institutions as severe. All District reports describe business loan demand as ""strong"" or ""very strong,"" although Boston and Kansas City indicate some leveling of demand at a high plateau. Inventory financing is generally reported as a major factor behind this demand. Most reports suggest that increases in demands for this purpose are attributable mainly to higher prices of inventoried goods although some Districts indicate that expanded stocks of materials are also a factor. New York and Chicago also report that delays in construction projects and sizable inventories of unsold houses may be contributing to loan demand. Some shifting of capital market borrowing to banks was also reported as a factor behind business loan demand by New York and San Francisco. Several Districts noted increased demand for accounts receivable financing and asubstitution of bank credit for commercial paper sales, especially by REIT's, as contributing factors. Chicago, Richmond, and Minneapolis reported strong demand for farm credit because of increasing difficulty being encountered by farmers in arranging trade credit. Several Districts cite increasing liquidity problems for businesses as well as for thrift institutions and commercial banks. Boston and Kansas City report vigorous complaints against tight money policies in some quarters, with Boston indicating financial stringencies for public utilities and insurance firms. A number of Districts report that banks are becoming increasingly selective in screening loan applicants and some Districts indicate a growing reluctance on the part of the banks to finance loan expansion through high cost CD financing. The agricultural outlook is reported generally good for crops, but low market prices and high production costs are a problem in the livestock sector. St. Louis reports that resulting production cutbacks could mean higher red meat prices later this year."
1974-06-12,national,overall,"""Moderate economic recovery"" capsules the views of most Red Book reports this month. Inflation and materials shortages once again seem to be major items of concern. While some reports expect a subsiding of inflationary pressures toward year's end, others expect these pressures to remain severe throughout the year. Current views on materials shortages also vary. Some Districts indicate a loosening of basic materials supplies, while other reports indicate continued shortages. Residential construction remains depressed, with strikes of construction trades making matters even worse in several Districts. Capital spending plans remain strong, though some downward revisions of capital expenditures have apparently taken place because of high interest rates, materials shortages, and the cyclical downturn in the economy. Inventory building as an inflationary hedge or because of the fear of shortages has been limited and scattered. Business loan demand remains at high levels despite high interest rates. However, there were some reports of slight reductions in demand; and lending is reported to be more selective now. Delinquencies on most types of loans are up. Consumer spending is beginning to show some life, with a renewed interest in larger autos as one area of strength. Heavy rains may cut into expected bumper crops in some Districts. ""Moderate economic recovery"" capsules the views of most Red Book reports this month. Inflation and materials shortages once again seem to be major items of concern. While some reports expect a subsiding of inflationary pressures toward year's end, others expect these pressures to remain severe throughout the year. Current views on materials shortages also vary. Some Districts indicate a loosening of basic materials supplies, while other reports indicate continued shortages. Residential construction remains depressed, with strikes of construction trades making matters even worse in several Districts. Capital spending plans remain strong, though some downward revisions of capital expenditures have apparently taken place because of high interest rates, materials shortages, and the cyclical downturn in the economy. Inventory building as an inflationary hedge or because of the fear of shortages has been limited and scattered. Business loan demand remains at high levels despite high interest rates. However, there were some reports of slight reductions in demand; and lending is reported to be more selective now. Delinquencies on most types of loans are up. Consumer spending is beginning to show some life, with a renewed interest in larger autos as one area of strength. Heavy rains may cut into expected bumper crops in some Districts. The first quarter slide in economic activity has apparently bottomed out, and a moderate economic expansion is now under way in most Districts. Philadelphia reports that the first quarter slide has ended. Cleveland, St. Louis, and Minneapolis note that economic activity is beginning to pick up and should continue to do so throughout the rest of this year. San Francisco, however, does not expect much improvement until the third quarter. A number of Districts emphasize the growing concern over inflation. Philadelphia sees inflation as the sore spot in its economy, with price increases on manufactured items and raw materials continuing throughout the year. This view was echoed by Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco, while Cleveland expects some abatement in price increases by the fourth quarter. Though supply problems continue to exist, some easing is beginning to be noticed. Boston, Richmond, and Chicago note some loosening in supplies. However, other Districts indicate continued difficulties and longer lead times in obtaining plastics, basic petrochemicals, steel, and electrical goods. Residential construction remains universally weak in all Districts. In Minneapolis, San Francisco, and St. Louis, strikes in the construction trades have depressed this sector even further. The Administration's new housing program is expected to have only a slight impact on residential construction. New York describes the program's probable impact as a ""cushion"" to a further decline in residential construction rather than a stimulus. Capital spending continues to be the major area of strength, but some retrenchment in these spending plans may now be taking place. Boston reports some postponing of capital spending because of anticipated declines in interest rates. Reports from New York indicate ""some cooling of enthusiasm"" regarding expansion programs. Materials shortages are curtailing capital spending in the San Francisco District. Inventory building because of materials scarcities is not as widespread as earlier reports indicated. Atlanta and New York note that high financing costs may be inhibiting inventory investment in many areas. Cleveland also finds some signs of inventory investment abating, and responses to Richmond's survey of manufacturers suggests that inventories may be higher than desired. Views are mixed on the effects of record-high interest rates on loan demand. Philadelphia, Cleveland, Minneapolis, Dallas, and San Francisco indicate little letup in loan demand. However, Boston, Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City note a slight reduction, particularly in demand for business loans. A pickup of deposit growth at commercial banks was also observed in several Districts. Richmond's survey of large District banks, as well as information from other Districts, reveals that firmer credit standards are being applied to loan requests. Several Districts also indicate that an increase in loan delinquencies and a rise in bankruptcies are a matter of growing concern. Consumer spending in most Districts is beginning to perk up. St. Louis and Kansas City indicate that appliances are selling well. Tourist activity is on the upswing and is expected to remain so through the summer months in the Atlanta and Minneapolis Districts. Several Districts note a pickup in the sale of larger-sized cars. Minneapolis suggests, however, that consumer resistance to higher car prices may be responsible for a more recent drop in sales. Agricultural prospects appear mixed. Reports from a number of Districts confirm the decline in livestock prices. San Francisco' s agricultural prospects are expected to be excellent throughout the District. Rain and bad weather have affected crop plantings and prospects for crop yields in the Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and Atlanta Districts."
1974-07-10,national,overall,"Although it may now be less appropriate than earlier this year to characterize the U.S. economy as one of general materials scarcity, reports from the Reserve Banks continue to emphasize this problem. A fair generalization may be that shortages of materials and components are still generally severe, although the availability of some items seems to be easing. Cleveland and Chicago both emphasize the tightness of supplies, and the spotty nature of the improvements. In the Richmond and Kansas City Districts, some materials are now more easily obtainable but only at much higher prices. The New York Bank reports no lessening of pressure on productive capacity. Its respondents expect some further moderation in basic commodity prices, but continued upward pressure on finished goods prices. Although it may now be less appropriate than earlier this year to characterize the U.S. economy as one of general materials scarcity, reports from the Reserve Banks continue to emphasize this problem. A fair generalization may be that shortages of materials and components are still generally severe, although the availability of some items seems to be easing. Cleveland and Chicago both emphasize the tightness of supplies, and the spotty nature of the improvements. In the Richmond and Kansas City Districts, some materials are now more easily obtainable but only at much higher prices. The New York Bank reports no lessening of pressure on productive capacity. Its respondents expect some further moderation in basic commodity prices, but continued upward pressure on finished goods prices. The situation in the steel industry, as reported by the Chicago and Cleveland Banks, is of special interest. A shortage of steel is expected to be a major barrier to output increases in other industries, as demand for steel continues to exceed supply. (1974 shipments are now expected to be below the 1973 total.) According to the Chicago Bank, ""shipments have been maintained at recent high rates by further reducing mill inventories below levels thought to be rock bottom."" The situation could tighten further because of equipment bottlenecks, and shortages of ore and coal. Demand for coal, from utilities as well as steel companies, is strong their stocks are low; and the overall supply situation is tight. Steel company officials are concerned about the possibility of a coal strike in November, which would severely disrupt operations. (An economist with a coal-producing firm considers it likely that there will be a coal strike in November of from 2 to 4 weeks duration.) Several Banks—including Chicago, Atlanta, and San Francisco—report increasing numbers of labor disputes and more strike activity. Construction in the Chicago District has been severely hampered by a strike of ready-mix-concrete truck drivers. Interwoven with the increasing amount of strike activity is the increasing number of large wage demands (and settlements), making the intensifying wage-push pressure on prices a matter of great concern. Capital spending remains generally, though not uniformly, strong. Chicago reports that demand for capital goods is well above output capabilities, and backlogs are rising in spite of all-out production; Cleveland also reports rising backlogs. Plant and equipment spending is behind schedule in the Atlanta District, but only because of capital goods delivery problems; capital spending plans remain strong across the District. In the Philadelphia District, however, manufacturers are taking a closer look at their plant and equipment spending plans and the outlook now is for a smaller increase in capital spending. Dallas, on the other hand, reports no significant revision of spending plans by large firms in its District. However, small businesses there are holding back on long-term expenditures because of the difficulty of getting bank financing and because of the high cost of funds. Both Chicago and Richmond report that some major electrical utilities are scaling down their expansion plans. Chicago states that financing problems are to a large extent responsible for the cancellation of some projects, and Richmond notes the announcement of cutbacks, postponements, and review of plans by several electrical utilities in its District. Eight of the twelve Banks refer in this Red Book to the continuing serious plight of the residential construction industry. The Chicago report is most blunt: ""Housing is in a severe recession, with hopes dashed for a revival in 1974."" The story is much the same for the Districts commenting: building permits off drastically; savings inflows to, and mortgage lending by, thrift institutions, very weak; construction sluggish and no recovery in sight. Indirect effects are also mentioned. San Francisco notes that the lumber and plywood industry is ""marking time"", waiting for a pickup in housing. Richmond reports that the sustained decline in residential construction has meant a 20 percent reduction this year in orders to the furniture industry. Only Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Atlanta report some improvement in retail sales, or consumer spending in general. Cleveland and Philadelphia refer to weak or sluggish consumer spending, as does Richmond for big-ticket items. Several Banks report that retail inventories are considered excessive by their respondents. Views of a number of retailers range from uncertain to pessimistic for sales during the rest of the year. Tourist business has been ""lackluster"" in New England and slow in the Mountain states of the Kansas City District, but tourism is on the upswing all across the Atlanta District and the industry's outlook for the rest of the summer is good in the Minneapolis District. Loan expansion by commercial banks continues to be limited by tight credit conditions, with deposit growth slowing down. Philadelphia reports loan demand as firm, held down primarily by restrictive loan policies rather than by adverse publicity. Business loan demand is characterized as strong by Atlanta, and by Minneapolis, where no let-up is foreseen. Richmond and Cleveland also report strong demand for business credit, with their banks becoming increasingly selective in allocating scarce funds. Kansas City and St. Louis detect some weakening in the rate of growth of demand for commercial loans. ""Lackluster growth"" summarizes the comments on recent deposits behavior, by Philadelphia, Atlanta, Kansas City, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Richmond. Boston's Eckstein and Samuelson warn of the dangers of overly tight money. New York respondents worry that the country is nearing serious trouble as the strains on liquidity increase. In Atlanta, apprehensive businessmen are reacting to the rumors of little liquidity in banks, while nonbank respondents for San Francisco call commercial banks ""dangerously illiquid."" Meanwhile, most Philadelphia banks have been able to roll over their CD's without major difficulties. Concern with the agricultural price situation is recorded by several Districts. Richmond and Atlanta report that poultry and cattle producers are caught in a severe cost-price squeeze. Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco comment further on the troubled cattle industry. Minneapolis and Kansas City explain the recent turnaround of grain prices as being partly due to the uncertain effects of unfavorable spring weather on the corn and soybean crops. Offsetting the bad farm news, San Francisco points to the high price for sugar beets, and Kansas City reports a good wheat harvest in progress."
1974-08-14,national,overall,"District reports present a mixed picture, with elements of weakness generally overshadowing those of strength. There are scattered indications that shortages and bottlenecks are breaking up in some sectors, although shortages of certain industrial goods remain critical. Many firms have been critically reexamining their capital spending plans, and some have scaled back such plans, not only among public utilities but in some other sectors as well. Similarly, more cautious inventory policies seem to have been adopted by some firms. Consumer spending on appliances continues sluggish, but demand for the remaining 1974 model automobiles appears to have strengthened. Residential construction continues to languish. Inflation remains a serious concern, especially in light of recent estimates of a significant drop in the expected harvest of certain key agricultural commodities. District reports present a mixed picture, with elements of weakness generally overshadowing those of strength. There are scattered indications that shortages and bottlenecks are breaking up in some sectors, although shortages of certain industrial goods remain critical. Many firms have been critically reexamining their capital spending plans, and some have scaled back such plans, not only among public utilities but in some other sectors as well. Similarly, more cautious inventory policies seem to have been adopted by some firms. Consumer spending on appliances continues sluggish, but demand for the remaining 1974 model automobiles appears to have strengthened. Residential construction continues to languish. Inflation remains a serious concern, especially in light of recent estimates of a significant drop in the expected harvest of certain key agricultural commodities. Regional differences in the state of overall economic activity were reflected in the District reports. Economic conditions were characterized as mixed by Cleveland and Atlanta and as showing ""marked contrasts"" by Chicago. Activity was described as sluggish and slowing by Philadelphia and Richmond, respectively, while Minneapolis reported that prospects were not as promising as earlier in the year. On the other hand, manufacturing activity was reported strong by St. Louis and San Francisco, and Dallas reported that factory orders are generally running ahead of year-ago levels. Capital spending plans are being subjected to increasingly critical scrutiny, and some cut-backs were reported even outside of the public utility sector, where deferrals and cancellations of capital investment projects are widespread. Among others, Philadelphia and Richmond report reluctance on the part of manufacturers to increase such outlays, with some manufacturers planning some cut-backs. Cleveland reports some softening in new orders for machine tools. On the other hand, Chicago and St. Louis report continued strong demand in the capital goods industry, and San Francisco reports that business investments are heavy. As in the case of capital spending plans, inventory policies have been under reexamination. The emergence of more cautious inventory policies on the part of businesses was reported by a number of banks, including New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland and Richmond. Some easing of shortages was reported by Chicago and Cleveland, although Cleveland also noted continued intense demand for steel and desperate attempts on the part of industrial firms and utilities to stockpile coal. Shortages were reported to be continuing to hamper output in the San Francisco District. Several banks reported that residential construction remains in the doldrums. Other types of consumer outlays appear sluggish for the most part, although Richmond noted a rebound in retail sales and San Francisco characterized such sales as ""good"". A number of banks reported weakness in sales of big-ticket items such as furniture and appliances. On the other hand, several banks, including St. Louis and San Francisco, observed a strengthening of automobile sales. Despite the apparent slowing down of business activity and the reported easing of supply conditions in a number of industries, concern over inflation continued to be expressed by many respondents. These fears have been heightened by recent reports of prospects of significantly lower harvest of certain key agricultural products, notably corn and soybeans, than expected earlier in the year-a situation described in detail by Minneapolis and Kansas City and referred to by several other banks. Agricultural conditions were reported to be more favorable in several Districts, including Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco. The demand for bank credit generally continued strong. The adoption of tighter bank lending policies, which in some instances may have helped contain the expansion, was mentioned by several banks, including Dallas, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and New York. Thrift institutions were widely reported to still be losing deposits, and to have been especially adversely affected by the recent Treasury sale of 9 percent notes in denominations as low as $1,000."
1974-09-05,national,overall,"The general thrust of this month's commentaries is that expectations concerning the near-term outlook for business have deteriorated considerably. Prospects for dampening inflation are viewed with various degrees of skepticism and pessimism; some businessmen fear wage-price controls. District reports emphasize supply-demand imbalances in labor, product, and financial markets. The supply situation is improving in some product lines, while conditions remain abnormally tight or have grown worse in others. Qualitative statements suggest that aggregate economic activity is registering little if any real improvement in the current quarter. Consumer spending remains sluggish, except for a recent spurt in auto sales. Inventories held by retailers generally are considered excessive. Housing is depressed throughout the nation, with indications of a further weakening in store. The capital spending picture may require reevaluation, as industrial firms and utilities announce cutbacks or postponements in their plans for expenditures. 
Agricultural prospects for crops and feedgrains have improved somewhat since early August, but the situation in the livestock industry is dismal. Savings outflows from thrift institutions continued in August, and banks in some Districts are also experiencing losses in deposits. Business loan demand remains strong, but is being curbed as bankers are becoming more selective in allocating credit. There is widespread concern among businessmen, bankers, and economists over the current and prospective effects of tight money. The general thrust of this month's commentaries is that expectations concerning the near-term outlook for business have deteriorated considerably. Prospects for dampening inflation are viewed with various degrees of skepticism and pessimism; some businessmen fear wage-price controls. District reports emphasize supply-demand imbalances in labor, product, and financial markets. The supply situation is improving in some product lines, while conditions remain abnormally tight or have grown worse in others. Qualitative statements suggest that aggregate economic activity is registering little if any real improvement in the current quarter. Consumer spending remains sluggish, except for a recent spurt in auto sales. Inventories held by retailers generally are considered excessive. Housing is depressed throughout the nation, with indications of a further weakening in store. The capital spending picture may require reevaluation, as industrial firms and utilities announce cutbacks or postponements in their plans for expenditures. 
Agricultural prospects for crops and feedgrains have improved somewhat since early August, but the situation in the livestock industry is dismal. Savings outflows from thrift institutions continued in August, and banks in some Districts are also experiencing losses in deposits. Business loan demand remains strong, but is being curbed as bankers are becoming more selective in allocating credit. There is widespread concern among businessmen, bankers, and economists over the current and prospective effects of tight money. Consumer spending is described as sluggish or weakening in almost every District. Sales of appliances and home furnishings, in particular, are depressed. Philadelphia reports widespread consumer resistance to higher prices on the new fall line of soft goods. Chicago says spending on discretionary goods is slow, and that recovery in recreational vehicles has ended. A number of Districts mention problems of excessive inventories at the retail level. New car sales seems to be an exception in the generally lackluster consumer sector. Dallas, Cleveland, Kansas City, St. Louis, and San Francisco all report recent strength in sales of 1974 models stemming from the publicity given to price increases on the 1975 models. Expectations are that new model year cars will suffer from buyer resistance to higher prices. In the capital goods sector, some weakening tendencies are developing in an otherwise strong market. San Francisco says high interest rates are thought to be depressing capital spending. Philadelphia sees signs of weakness ahead. Minneapolis reports some cutbacks in planned expenditures on machinery and equipment in farming areas where crop prospects are uncertain and cattle prices are depressed. Atlanta says the volume of commercial and industrial building is declining. A number of Districts (Boston, Richmond, Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis) commented on reductions in capital spending by utilities or emphasized their current financial problems. Residential construction appears to be depressed in every District, and prospects for recovery before 1975 are bleak. Thrift institutions continued to lose deposits in August, according to St. Louis, Dallas, San Francisco, New York, Richmond, and Cleveland. High interest rates have caused postponements and cutbacks in major condominium projects in Atlanta. In the agricultural sector, early summer drought has severely damaged crops in many parts of the nation. Recent rainfall has improved the situation, however. Chicago mentions that now the major concern for the corn crop is cool weather and an early frost. The livestock feeding industry is experiencing its own recession, according to Kansas City, Dallas, San Francisco, Minneapolis, Chicago, and Atlanta. Banks continue to face strong business loan demands in San Francisco, Philadelphia, Richmond, and Kansas City. Those Districts all report that bankers are becoming increasingly selective in granting loan requests, particularly from new borrowers. Kansas City, however, notes that loans to new customers in energy-related fields are being accommodated. Dallas mentions a problem of loan delinquencies in real estate and heavy construction."
1974-10-09,national,overall,"On balance this month's comments indicate a further slowing in overall economic activity and more widespread pessimism regarding the near-term outlook. Residential construction remains in a depressed state throughout most of the nation. The situation in the housing sector is causing a marked decline in consumer outlays for durables related to housing, and aggregate real consumer spending appears to be weakening further. Business capital spending continues relatively strong although there are further reports of delays and cutbacks of previously scheduled outlays. The manufacturing sector presents a mixed picture with reduced demand pressure and fewer shortages in some industries, particularly those industries serving primarily the housing and consumer durables sectors, but continued tightness and shortages elsewhere. Several Districts report that the improved supply-demand balance in some industries has reduced the upward pressure on prices for certain raw materials and intermediate industrial goods, but no precipitous softening of industrial prices is yet evident. Adverse weather conditions are apparently restricting crop yields and hampering the growth of farm income in the central portion of the country, and conditions in the livestock industry have deteriorated further. Most Districts report more restrictive bank lending policies and a consequent slowing in the growth of business loans. Thrift institutions experienced further net deposit outflows in several Districts during September. On balance this month's comments indicate a further slowing in overall economic activity and more widespread pessimism regarding the near-term outlook. Residential construction remains in a depressed state throughout most of the nation. The situation in the housing sector is causing a marked decline in consumer outlays for durables related to housing, and aggregate real consumer spending appears to be weakening further. Business capital spending continues relatively strong although there are further reports of delays and cutbacks of previously scheduled outlays. The manufacturing sector presents a mixed picture with reduced demand pressure and fewer shortages in some industries, particularly those industries serving primarily the housing and consumer durables sectors, but continued tightness and shortages elsewhere. Several Districts report that the improved supply-demand balance in some industries has reduced the upward pressure on prices for certain raw materials and intermediate industrial goods, but no precipitous softening of industrial prices is yet evident. Adverse weather conditions are apparently restricting crop yields and hampering the growth of farm income in the central portion of the country, and conditions in the livestock industry have deteriorated further. Most Districts report more restrictive bank lending policies and a consequent slowing in the growth of business loans. Thrift institutions experienced further net deposit outflows in several Districts during September. Retail sales appear to be generally flat in current dollar terms implying the possibility of some decline in real consumption during recent weeks. Boston, New York, and Philadelphia report that consumers are more cautious and bargain conscious. Several Districts indicate a further decline in sales of big ticket items, notably furniture and home appliances. Cleveland and Chicago report new model automobile sales are off to a slow start. Dealers in the Minneapolis and San Francisco Districts fear that higher prices, difficulties in obtaining financing, and the recent spurt in 1974 model sales will constrain new model sales in coming months. Conditions in the construction sector remain dismal, although Philadelphia reports a higher rate of nonresidential building than last year due to increased public works construction. Dallas, on the other hand, foresees a sharp curtailment of nonresidential outlays in coming months due to a lack of interim financing. Nonresidential building permits have dropped by 50 percent in the Dallas District during the last three months. No District expects any near-term improvement in the residential sector given the pervasive lack of mortgage credit. Business fixed investment remains the strongest sector of the economy, although there are additional signs of a reduced rate of planned capital expansion. Atlanta and San Francisco report sizable reductions in planned outlays by utilities. Chicago notes a reduction in the demand for certain types of capital goods due to postponements and cancellations by utilities and automobile manufacturers. In the Cleveland District machine tool orders, while still strong, are running somewhat below their peak earlier this year. Conditions in the manufacturing sector are spotty, reflecting the sluggishness in the housing and consumer sectors on the one hand and the relative strength of capital spending on the other. Industries closely related to housing and consumer durables (lumber, glass, textiles, furniture, and appliances) are noticeably weaker. In addition, several Districts (New York, Chicago, Kansas City, and San Francisco) report that some industrial materials, particularly fuels, certain chemicals, and paper, are more readily available. The easing of supply constraints in these industries is contributing to less aggressive purchasing and some declines in order backlogs. Cleveland, Chicago, Kansas City, and Dallas indicate somewhat softerprices for chemicals, fuels, and other materials, but no major break in industrial prices has occurred to date. Steel markets remain tight in most Districts, due in part to the prospective coal strike. Both Cleveland and San Francisco suggest an easing in the steel situation in coming months, however, due to the increased availability of foreign steel.  The agricultural outlook appears generally weaker. Atlanta reports favorable harvest yields with the exception of the hurricane-damaged Louisiana sugar cane crop. But Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Kansas City indicate that early frosts will substantially reduce corn and soybean yields, reducing farm incomes and increasing feed costs. The demand for business loans remains strong in most Districts, although St. Louis notes a leveling off following the sharp upward trend earlier this year. Philadelphia, Richmond, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas all report slower growth in outstanding loans and commitments due to more restrictive bank lending policies. Several Districts indicate that both banks and thrift institutions are restricting new loans to established customers."
1974-11-13,national,overall,"Though some areas remain strong, economic weakness appeared to be spreading, even before the coal strike began. The consensus is a deterioration in economic conditions since last month's reports, with the earliest chances for a recovery in mid-1975 and then only a mild upturn. The drop in residential construction has spread to many other industries, such as timber and lumber, furniture, and textiles. Auto and auto-related manufacturing industries are also depressed because of the resistance to buying the new model cars. Plant closings, job layoffs, and, in some cases, bankruptcies have resulted. The regions hardest hit are those where these industries predominate: the East, Midwest, and Southeast. Other manufacturing industries, particularly capital goods, report continued strong demand. However, some softening may be starting in these industries, with an easing of new machine tool orders and cutbacks or postponements of capital-spending plans reported from some Districts. 
Consumer spending, particularly for big-ticket items, is off. Reports indicate that consumers are increasingly becoming more price-conscious and purchasing more heavily sale merchandise. Production and general sales declines have resulted in easier availability of many materials in short supply only a few months ago and, in some cases, lower materials prices. Only a few items are still in short supply. There was near-universal accord that because of sales declines and the greater availability of basic materials, manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade inventories are now too high. Realignment of these inventories will slow economic activity through the early part of next year. Bank lending has leveled off in most Districts because of a decline in loan demand and more restrictive loan requirements. Savings and loans inflows were reported in several Districts but are not expected to give any immediate relief to housing. A number of favorable crop reports were received, but livestock producers are still caught in a cost-price squeeze. Though some areas remain strong, economic weakness appeared to be spreading, even before the coal strike began. The consensus is a deterioration in economic conditions since last month's reports, with the earliest chances for a recovery in mid-1975 and then only a mild upturn. The drop in residential construction has spread to many other industries, such as timber and lumber, furniture, and textiles. Auto and auto-related manufacturing industries are also depressed because of the resistance to buying the new model cars. Plant closings, job layoffs, and, in some cases, bankruptcies have resulted. The regions hardest hit are those where these industries predominate: the East, Midwest, and Southeast. Other manufacturing industries, particularly capital goods, report continued strong demand. However, some softening may be starting in these industries, with an easing of new machine tool orders and cutbacks or postponements of capital-spending plans reported from some Districts. 
Consumer spending, particularly for big-ticket items, is off. Reports indicate that consumers are increasingly becoming more price-conscious and purchasing more heavily sale merchandise. Production and general sales declines have resulted in easier availability of many materials in short supply only a few months ago and, in some cases, lower materials prices. Only a few items are still in short supply. There was near-universal accord that because of sales declines and the greater availability of basic materials, manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade inventories are now too high. Realignment of these inventories will slow economic activity through the early part of next year. Bank lending has leveled off in most Districts because of a decline in loan demand and more restrictive loan requirements. Savings and loans inflows were reported in several Districts but are not expected to give any immediate relief to housing. A number of favorable crop reports were received, but livestock producers are still caught in a cost-price squeeze. Plant closings and layoffs are now appearing more frequently in District reports. Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis all report production cutbacks, plant closings, and layoffs by a wide range of manufacturers-such as autos, mobile homes, appliances, televisions, furniture, textiles, bicycles, and electrical components. Many of these cutbacks are related to the decline in housing, although a general fall-off in demand is also responsible. Lumber producers in the Atlanta and San Francisco Districts have been severely hit by the decline in residential construction. Lumber demand is practically nonexistent. Some areas have escaped substantial layoffs, however. Both Minneapolis and Kansas City Districts report only a slight rise in unemployment. They do not expect the situation to worsen significantly in the near future. Capital goods industries remain the most buoyant. But even here more signs of cutbacks and postponements were reported. Cleveland reports machine tool orders still are strong, but a number of spending programs for 1975 have been cut back. Atlanta, Chicago, and Kansas City report similar cut backs. Capital equipment orders in the Chicago District have fallen off recently, and stretch-outs of orders have also become more common. A Richmond survey shows that one-third of its respondents now consider capital-spending plans excessive. Orders remain strong for steel and other types of capital goods, however. There is growing evidence of a general weakening in demand for most consumer items. Auto sales are uniformly poor in all Districts. Most big-ticket items are not selling well. Only Minneapolis reports any strength in higher-priced consumer goods. Reports from San Francisco, Dallas, Boston, New York, Atlanta, and Philadelphia suggest that price cutting and sales campaigns by retailers and discount shopping by consumers are now more commonly practiced. Expectations about Christmas sales range from optimistic in Minneapolis and Dallas to Boston's report of no expected change in sales from last Christmas. Shortages have apparently eased considerably according to reports. Boston, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, and San Francisco all indicate that many shortages are abating. Cleveland notes that the greater supply availability has led to a moderation of materials prices. Several Districts report continued shortages of steel and petroleum-base products; but in the Chicago and San Francisco Districts, even these shortages have moderated. The coal strike will create new shortages, but it is too early to tell how severe these will be. Excessive inventories and the need for inventory realignment appear to be on many businessmen's minds. Excessive inventories are the result of both declining sales and the easing of shortages. Dallas reports higher-than-desired retail store inventories are attributed in part to declining sales but also to overshipments by suppliers who are themselves trying to reduce inventories. Concern over shortages has dramatically given way to attempts to reduce inventories, according to Chicago's report. In the Kansas City District, the attempt to reduce inventories was one reason cited for the flatness in bank loan demand. Most Districts report that loan demand has begun to ease. Philadelphia notes that loan commitments have fallen both because of a decline in demand as well as more restrictive lending policies by many banks. Business loan demand appears to be off the most. San Francisco indicates that many large borrowers are returning to the capital markets. Minneapolis is the only District reporting continued strong loan demand because of agricultural borrowing. Inflows to time and savings accounts at commercial banks are beginning in many Districts. Funds are also beginning to flow back into savings and loan institutions. The Kansas City report indicates that savings and loan associations are beginning to see a return to ""black ink."" New York also notes an inflow but doesn't believe it will significantly improve the housing situation in the near future."
1974-12-11,national,overall,"The news of spreading weakness in the economy has not changed much from last month, although a somewhat firmer consensus on the side of pessimism emerges, if only because of the confirming character of this round of reports. Most Districts tell of further declines in consumer demand, softening employment, and increasing uneasiness about the economic outlook. And again as was the case last month, several report of business efforts and intentions to reduce inventories, to cut costs, and to reduce investment in plant and equipment. Some subsectors of the economy, such as the oil industry and parts of agriculture, are thriving amidst an otherwise general slump in business. Still others, such as home building and cattle farming, remain deeply depressed. Bank deposits and loans continue roughly flat. Additional modest inflows to thrift institutions are not expected to help home building in the near future. The news of spreading weakness in the economy has not changed much from last month, although a somewhat firmer consensus on the side of pessimism emerges, if only because of the confirming character of this round of reports. Most Districts tell of further declines in consumer demand, softening employment, and increasing uneasiness about the economic outlook. And again as was the case last month, several report of business efforts and intentions to reduce inventories, to cut costs, and to reduce investment in plant and equipment. Some subsectors of the economy, such as the oil industry and parts of agriculture, are thriving amidst an otherwise general slump in business. Still others, such as home building and cattle farming, remain deeply depressed. Bank deposits and loans continue roughly flat. Additional modest inflows to thrift institutions are not expected to help home building in the near future. The deepening recession is quite evident in this month's Redbook, as the more insulated Districts and lagging sectors begin to come in weaker. The swing in the Minneapolis report is of special interest. Ninth District directors and businessmen were still relatively optimistic last month, but this time around they joined the ranks of the worried pessimists. The reports of Kansas City and Dallas also show more concern than last month. In November, Kansas City observed that Tenth District economic conditions were somewhat better than in the nation as a whole. This month, they are said to be looking about as bad. In November, Dallas department store executives were optimistic about the Christmas season. This month, there is a strong indication of sluggish retail sales in the report from the Eleventh District. Meanwhile, the Districts which have been reporting increasingly gloomy economic conditions for many months are reporting even lower depths of pessimism. The spread of the recession to business fixed investment was indicated by the cutbacks in capital spending plans reported last month by five Districts. Three more, Boston, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, confirm the findings this month. Current activity in capital goods industries continues high, as reported by St. Louis, but the leading indicators for this sector suggest a weakening ahead. Cleveland reports a significant reduction in buying lead time for capital equipment. Chicago and Boston note declining new orders for capital goods, although backlogs will keep suppliers busy for most of 1975. Retailers are losing hope for either a merry Christmas season or a happy New Year's spring. Even the most optimistic store executives, those reporting to Minneapolis, do not expect much of an increase in real sales. Richmond reports a decline in the dollar volume of retail sales, and real retail sales are apparently down in the remaining Districts. With inventories considered excessive in view of expected sales, stores are heavily promoting sales of merchandise at reduced prices. The New York report suggests that some firms may have already been successful in liquidating inventories and are now operating with ""lean"" stocks. But inventories arc reported high by Cleveland, Richmond, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. Agricultural conditions are reported to have deteriorated in the Eleventh District by Dallas, due to depressed livestock markets, and big shortfalls in crop yields of wheat, grain sorghum, hay, and cotton. San Francisco reports that the strongest sector in the Twelfth District is agriculture, although cattle producers are under a severe profits squeeze there too. Crop reports from Atlanta are mixed, with cotton poor, corn, rice, and soybeans normal, and burly tobacco good. Richmond reports a record-breaking value for a crop of flue-cured tobacco, and notes that crop receipts through the third quarter of 1974 registered a 15 per cent increase over a year ago. However, the index for prices received by farmers now is at last year's level, while the index of prices paid is up 17 per cent over a year ago. This month's Redbook, as noted early in this summary, contains reports that confirm those of a month ago, and are therefore not repeated in a District-by-District fashion here. Suffice it to say that this month's evidence is overwhelming in establishing the weakness of the economy and in indicating its likelihood of continued decline. Virtually every indicator of general economic conditions that is reported on by the 12 Districts points to deepening recession at worst, or continued sluggishness at best. But, thanks to this, gains appear to be materializing on the price front. The pre-Christmas sales are good news for consumers. Cleveland purchasing agents report a continued slowing in the rate of price increases. Atlanta calls attention to the 30-40 per cent decline in lumber prices, and reports that some suppliers of other items once short but now long are reducing prices. Unfortunately, the good reports indicating slowing inflation are offset by the more disappointing reports such as Philadelphia's, in which businessmen relay their all-too-recent experiences with inflation, and tell of their expectations that such rapid price increases will continue at least through May."
1975-01-15,national,overall,"District ""Red Book"" reports for mid-January generally reflect the   accentuation in most parts of the country of the pronounced   deterioration of the economy in the recent past suggested by   nationwide economic indicators. Retail sales in most areas over the   holiday season were only equal or barely above last year's level in   dollar terms and, given the sharp rise in retail prices over the   past year, lower in volume. Moreover, this year's level was achieved   only by dint of heavy pre-Christmas aggressive promotion, special   sales, and price cutting in addition to the usual early January   clearance sales. Against this background, a number of respondents in   various Districts regarded retail inventories to be relatively high   to excessive in relation to current sale prospects, with increased   reports of efforts to reduce positions, both at the retail and   manufacturing level. Planned business plant and equipment outlays,   apart from energy related industries, on balance appeared to be   weaker than had been expected, and a number of Districts report   cutbacks, or outright cancellations of planned projects. The private   residential construction, and to a lesser extent commercial   construction, picture remained bleak, although a reported moderate   reversal in the outflow of deposits at thrift institutions gives   hope that the eventual bottoming of the decline in that industry may   be approaching. The outlook for near term manufacturing activity   other than related energy industries was further dimmed by   widespread reports of declining new orders, shipments and backlogs.  District ""Red Book"" reports for mid-January generally reflect the   accentuation in most parts of the country of the pronounced   deterioration of the economy in the recent past suggested by   nationwide economic indicators. Retail sales in most areas over the   holiday season were only equal or barely above last year's level in   dollar terms and, given the sharp rise in retail prices over the   past year, lower in volume. Moreover, this year's level was achieved   only by dint of heavy pre-Christmas aggressive promotion, special   sales, and price cutting in addition to the usual early January   clearance sales. Against this background, a number of respondents in   various Districts regarded retail inventories to be relatively high   to excessive in relation to current sale prospects, with increased   reports of efforts to reduce positions, both at the retail and   manufacturing level. Planned business plant and equipment outlays,   apart from energy related industries, on balance appeared to be   weaker than had been expected, and a number of Districts report   cutbacks, or outright cancellations of planned projects. The private   residential construction, and to a lesser extent commercial   construction, picture remained bleak, although a reported moderate   reversal in the outflow of deposits at thrift institutions gives   hope that the eventual bottoming of the decline in that industry may   be approaching. The outlook for near term manufacturing activity   other than related energy industries was further dimmed by   widespread reports of declining new orders, shipments and backlogs.  Against this background, virtually all Districts report a rise in     the jobless rate, concentrated in the automobile and construction     related industries, but also widening to other economic sectors. In     addition, there were increased reports of rises in payment     delinquencies and in bankruptcies. On the brighter side were reports     of lessened, even vanishing, materials scarcities, of price     reductions of primary commodities and of downward price pressure at     the manufacturing and wholesale level; apart from the possibly only     temporary promotional price concessions mentioned above, however,     these reductions as yet seemed to have had limited influence on     retail prices generally. Concerning retail sales, San Francisco, among other Districts,   reports consumer spending in December as restrained, and while   retail sales rose in dollar terms, this resulted primarily from   vigorous efforts by retailers to draw down excessive inventories.   Minneapolis reports that most retailers surveyed had December sales   increases of only about 5 percent, in good part achieved by price   cutting. Philadelphia District dollar sales in December were only   slightly above last year's level with retailers relatively   pessimistic regarding the outlook for January. Cleveland describes   retail trade as ""poor"", despite a late spurt during the week prior   to Christmas, while Richmond finds continued weakness in the sale of   big ticket items. Atlanta characterizes pre-Christmas sales as very   good in many areas of the District, largely in response to heavy   promotions and price cuts. St. Louis reports that department stores'   dollar sales were up somewhat from a year ago, a better performance   than had been expected. Holiday sales in the New York District were   on the weak side, but no more than had been expected, and reported   to have been strengthening somewhat recently. This relatively sluggish retail sales performance for this time of   year finds its counterpart in excessive inventories, and in actual   and expected efforts to reduce stocks, at the retail and, in some   instances, at the manufacturing level, as reported by a number of   banks, including Minneapolis, Kansas City, Richmond, Cleveland,   Chicago and New York. Moreover, declines in new orders and backlogs   and increases in cancellations, as well as the virtual elimination   of many shortages and the appearance of surpluses of some materials   and finished goods, are noted by a number of banks, including   Philadelphia, Cleveland, Chicago, Richmond, San Francisco and   Dallas. Dallas, however, reports that firms supplying steel and   fabricated metal products to energy related industries continue to   be hard pressed to meet demand. Cleveland and Richmond note that   sharp reductions in natural gas supplies are adversely affecting   production. The well known plight of the construction industry is mentioned in a   number of reports. Atlanta notes, however, that owing to an   improving inflow of dollars to thrift institutions, funds are   rapidly becoming more readily available for the housing industry,   while Kansas City reports that several commercial banks plan to   commit funds for future construction. An improvement in inflows to   savings and loan associations is also reported by Minneapolis and   Chicago, but these institutions are not expected to increase loan   commitments until they have reduced their large borrowing and   increased their liquid assets. Over half of the reports point to evidence of a weaker capital   spending picture. Among others, Boston reports that orders for   machine tools have ""all but vanished"", while Cleveland and St. Louis   report a weakening in the sale of such items. San Francisco reports   more cancellations of capital projects; almost half of the   manufacturers surveyed by Richmond consider current plant equipment   excessive; and Chicago states that although producers of heavy   capital equipment continue to operate at capacity, backlogs are   declining, and in the case of heavy trucks have ""dissolved"". The unemployment picture has darkened throughout most parts of the   nation, although there are regional variations in the intensity of   the problem, ranging from ""probably unprecedented since World War   II"" in the Chicago and Detroit areas to the report by Minneapolis   that, while layoffs have occurred in the District, they have not   reached the proportions reported nationally. At the same time, there   were some reports of continued shortages of skilled workers and, in   the Dallas District, of unskilled labor as well."
1975-02-12,national,overall,"The general thrust of this month's comments is that the economic   situation has deteriorated and further weakening is in store.   Unemployment seems likely to rise again in February, on the basis of   widespread reports of more layoffs since early January. Slackening   conditions in the labor market, however, have done little thus far   to curb wage demands, according to New York and Chicago. On the   other hand, the recession appears to be having a depressing effect   on prices, perhaps even more than the indexes suggest. The overall   impression of the District reports is that the recession has become   more pervasive but there are regional and industry sources of   strength in the nation's economy. Reduced natural gas supplies,   mentioned by Cleveland and Richmond, have contributed to cutbacks in   industrial production and employment. Housing remains in the   doldrums throughout the nation, retail trade generally continues to   be sluggish except for a pickup in new car sales, the capital goods   sector is showing signs of further weakness, and excessive   inventories remain a problem for many firms. A number of Districts   report instances of inventory liquidation underway. At the moment   there seems to be little optimism regarding prospects for an early   recovery. In one of the more bearish reports, for example, Boston   points to growing fear of a ""second tier"" in the recession; its   academic correspondents are particularly concerned over the state of   the economy. Alternatively, there are some encouraging items.   Philadelphia reports that more than half the manufacturers in its   survey are optimistic for the outlook six months ahead. Richmond   says there seems to have been a break in the mood of pessimism which   has prevailed over the past few months, with an increase in the   proportion of their survey respondents expecting an improvement in   business activity in the next six months. Atlanta mentions a rebound   in tourism in Central and South Florida, and that businessmen seem   to have a renewed air of optimism since the first of the year. The general thrust of this month's comments is that the economic   situation has deteriorated and further weakening is in store.   Unemployment seems likely to rise again in February, on the basis of   widespread reports of more layoffs since early January. Slackening   conditions in the labor market, however, have done little thus far   to curb wage demands, according to New York and Chicago. On the   other hand, the recession appears to be having a depressing effect   on prices, perhaps even more than the indexes suggest. The overall   impression of the District reports is that the recession has become   more pervasive but there are regional and industry sources of   strength in the nation's economy. Reduced natural gas supplies,   mentioned by Cleveland and Richmond, have contributed to cutbacks in   industrial production and employment. Housing remains in the   doldrums throughout the nation, retail trade generally continues to   be sluggish except for a pickup in new car sales, the capital goods   sector is showing signs of further weakness, and excessive   inventories remain a problem for many firms. A number of Districts   report instances of inventory liquidation underway. At the moment   there seems to be little optimism regarding prospects for an early   recovery. In one of the more bearish reports, for example, Boston   points to growing fear of a ""second tier"" in the recession; its   academic correspondents are particularly concerned over the state of   the economy. Alternatively, there are some encouraging items.   Philadelphia reports that more than half the manufacturers in its   survey are optimistic for the outlook six months ahead. Richmond   says there seems to have been a break in the mood of pessimism which   has prevailed over the past few months, with an increase in the   proportion of their survey respondents expecting an improvement in   business activity in the next six months. Atlanta mentions a rebound   in tourism in Central and South Florida, and that businessmen seem   to have a renewed air of optimism since the first of the year. In the consumer sector, heavy sales promotions and price-cutting   have had limited success stimulating retail trade. Sales are   described as weak or sluggish in virtually every District. The auto   manufacturers' rebate program has made new car sales an exception,   but as Chicago notes, has not brought about a boom. Atlanta adds   that some dealers worry about what will happen when the rebate   program ends. Philadelphia says retailers are pessimistic about the   near-term outlook, and Boston reports that retailers are growing   more cautious in their ordering. New York and Richmond say some   progress has been made reducing excessive retail inventories. In the capital goods sector, several industries are still operating   at a high level. Chicago says large order backlogs are maintaining   output of equipment for coal mining, oil well drilling, rail   transport, ore boats, heavy agricultural operations, and chemical   processing. Orders for many other types of capital goods have   dropped sharply, however. Philadelphia reports that capital spending   plans have been cut back in the retail sector, but are holding firm   in manufacturing. New York and Cleveland see signs of weakening in   capital spending. Richmond and Atlanta mention little scaling down   or retrenchment in spending plans. In New England, firms say most   investments are planned for such purposes as cost reduction,   replacement, and compliance; plans for expansion are nil. San   Francisco commented that an increase in the investment tax credit   would not help capital spending until late 1975. The agricultural outlook for soybeans and feed grains appears to be   encouraging, according to Dallas, St. Louis, and Richmond. Despite   recent declines in crop prices, there is still enough incentive to   increase production plans, The sharp drop in cotton prices is   causing a switch from cotton to soybean production. Kansas City,   Dallas, Minneapolis, and San Francisco all comment on the   difficulties of livestock producers, many of whom have gone   bankrupt. Among Districts commenting on banking developments, Philadelphia   says prospects of large defaults in loans are concerning bankers.   Dallas says that most banks have increased reserves for loan   defaults. It also reports that delinquencies on farm loans have   risen. No District reported any strength in business or consumer   loan demand. Demand deposits have declined generally. Thrift institutions continue to have net savings inflows, according   to Dallas, St. Louis, Atlanta, and Cleveland. Chicago notes a   dropoff in savings inflows in late January."
1975-03-12,national,overall,"The general impression given by this month's Redbook reports is some   moderation in the rate of decline in economic activity. While no   District reports suggest that a general economic upswing is ""just   around the corner"", with some exceptions the March reports indicate   that the deepening pessimism that had characterized businessmen's   outlook in previous recent months may have abated significantly.   Respondents in most Districts either expect a turnaround at some   point in the second half of the year, or expressed relatively   bullish sentiments regarding prospects for their individual firms   and industry. Retail sales were generally described as running at a   lower level than a year ago in unit terms, but the decline in   consumers' outlays in general appears to be leveling off, and some   Districts actually reported some improvement. Retail inventories   have been substantially reduced, but manufacturers' inventories   still remain high. The outlook for the housing industry on balance   appears to be improving, if only slightly. There were further   reports of price cutting, both at the retail and production levels.   On the darker side, the employment situation continued to   deteriorate in many parts of the country. The general impression given by this month's Redbook reports is some   moderation in the rate of decline in economic activity. While no   District reports suggest that a general economic upswing is ""just   around the corner"", with some exceptions the March reports indicate   that the deepening pessimism that had characterized businessmen's   outlook in previous recent months may have abated significantly.   Respondents in most Districts either expect a turnaround at some   point in the second half of the year, or expressed relatively   bullish sentiments regarding prospects for their individual firms   and industry. Retail sales were generally described as running at a   lower level than a year ago in unit terms, but the decline in   consumers' outlays in general appears to be leveling off, and some   Districts actually reported some improvement. Retail inventories   have been substantially reduced, but manufacturers' inventories   still remain high. The outlook for the housing industry on balance   appears to be improving, if only slightly. There were further   reports of price cutting, both at the retail and production levels.   On the darker side, the employment situation continued to   deteriorate in many parts of the country. Among the comments regarding the economic outlook, Boston reports   that its directors were more hopeful, and while they did not as yet   believe the economy to be on the threshold of a turnaround, they   felt that following the rapid deterioration in previous recent   months, business activity was now stabilizing. Philadelphia reports   little change in economic activity, which it considers an   improvement compared with the declines in previous months. Moreover,   it notes that businessmen in general expect the District's economy   to pick up in the fall. Similarly, while Richmond reports a   continuation of a broad decline in economic activity, it also   reports an easing of the pervasive mood of pessimism displayed   during the past few months as more businessmen now see ""a light at   the end of the tunnel."" St. Louis reports that the rate of decline   in unemployment and output has moderated, and indeed notes that   activity in selected industries continues at relatively high levels.   Respondents in the San Francisco District expressed the belief that   conditions in the District's hardest hit industries—construction,   lumber, and transportation equipment—have now stabilized. On the   other hand, Chicago reports that pessimism has not been so deep and   widespread since the 1930's. Retail sales continue to be generally sluggish in most Districts,   but there appear to be scattered encouraging developments. St.   Louis, for example, observes that no further decline in department   store sales has been reported. Cleveland reports that bonuses as   well as rebates spurred a sharp jump in auto sales in February,   while more modest increases were reported in several other   Districts. Dallas reports a rise in sales, with big-ticket items in   particular moving well ahead of their sluggish pace of recent   months. Atlanta, on the other hand, reports that home appliance   sales have been particularly weak but that apparel sales have been   doing well. A very recent pickup in retail sales was observed by   Kansas City and New York, while Philadelphia reports optimism on the   part of retailers despite sluggish sales. Minneapolis reports that   retail sales have held up well in Montana and that the area's   businessmen have grown more optimistic. Most Districts commenting on   the subject report a decline, in varying degree, in retailers'   inventories from their excessive levels at the turn of the year.   Continued high inventories at the manufacturing level, however, are   mentioned by a number of Banks, including Atlanta, Boston,   Cleveland, and Richmond. Activity in the housing industry in general continues at a low   level. There were indications, however, that the industry may be   coming out of its slump as mortgage funds become more readily   available with the sustained inflow of funds to thrift institutions   and as the inventory of unsold residential units is being worked   off. Atlanta and Kansas City report some improvement in home sales.   Cleveland reports a moderate rise in residential construction   contracts from their severely depressed levels, while builders in   the St. Louis District anticipate an early increase in residential   construction activity. The darkest spot in the current economic picture, of course, is the   high level of unemployment reported by most Districts. Richmond   reports that unemployment rates have risen to record levels in many   areas. Minneapolis reports a sharp rise in unemployment in January,   although the jobless rate for the District remains below the   nationwide average. Cleveland mentions that numerous lay-offs have   been reported thus far in March, while Chicago also refers to ""waves"" of lay-offs in durable goods industries. San Francisco and   Philadelphia respondents do not look for an increase in the level of   employment over the near term, which combined with the growth in the   available labor force is expected to be reflected in further   increases in the jobless rate. On the other hand, Kansas City notes   an improvement in the employment situation at automobile   manufacturing plants in the Kansas City area, while St. Louis   mentions that scattered reports for February suggest a leveling off   of the unemployment rate."
1975-04-09,national,overall,"This month, reports from the twelve District Banks show faint signs   of optimism—not that the recession has already bottomed out, but   that it is approaching bottom. The unemployment picture is grim, and   there is no quick solution in sight. But inflation is abating.   Retail sales are weak, and the manufacturing picture is mixed, but   the inventory correction which must precede recovery is occurring.   While construction activity is very soft, mortgage rates are   dropping and the new tax bill provides some additional incentive to   get housing going again. Agriculture is likely to be a very strong   sector in the months ahead. Bank loan activity is weak throughout   the country, but savings inflows should provide the industry with   large amounts of lendable funds once the recovery starts. This month, reports from the twelve District Banks show faint signs   of optimism—not that the recession has already bottomed out, but   that it is approaching bottom. The unemployment picture is grim, and   there is no quick solution in sight. But inflation is abating.   Retail sales are weak, and the manufacturing picture is mixed, but   the inventory correction which must precede recovery is occurring.   While construction activity is very soft, mortgage rates are   dropping and the new tax bill provides some additional incentive to   get housing going again. Agriculture is likely to be a very strong   sector in the months ahead. Bank loan activity is weak throughout   the country, but savings inflows should provide the industry with   large amounts of lendable funds once the recovery starts. The picture in manufacturing is a mixture of good and bad. Post-   rebate auto sales have been soft for all except luxury and imported   car lines. However, some progress is reported in trimming auto   inventories and auto manufacturers are starting to produce some   models again. In contrast, both Chicago and Cleveland report that   steel production has been strong. Demand has recently begun to   slacken, but in the Cleveland District, the industry is still   producing to rebuild its own inventories. Kansas City reports that   its area's extractive industries are quite busy. Dallas, however,   notes that oil refining is now operating well below capacity as a   result of declining demand for oil and a shortage of available   storage capacity. There is a consensus that the inventory adjustment process is moving   along well. In manufacturing, San Francisco reports that the firms   in its area are over the worst of their cutbacks, while Richmond   notes that the process may continue for another 3-6 months in its   District. But whether it be 3 months or 6 months, the message from   all areas of the country is that progress has been significant and   that production consistent with current demand is likely to begin   soon. In the retail sector the signals are less uniform. In general,   there have been substantial inventory reductions, but in some lines   of goods more trimming will be required. Consumer durables is one   example offered by Cleveland as an area which still has substantial   inventories.   Whether retail sales will rebound enough to move these durables in   the near future is uncertain. Retail sales in March were weak in   most areas of the country. An early Easter, cold weather, and in   Philadelphia a major transit strike all combined to keep sales down.   Yet many Districts report that their retailers see signs of rising   consumer sentiment which make them cautiously optimistic about the   future. There are also hopeful signs in other sectors of the economy.   Chicago, Kansas City and San Francisco all report strength in their   agricultural areas—despite the declining prices of farm products.   Residential and nonresidential construction are both still weak, but   the signs are hopeful. Unsold inventories of structures are said to   be manageable everywhere except in the Southeast and Far West.   Atlanta and San Francisco both report that builders in their region   are pessimistic about the chances for a quick recovery even with the   new Federal tax incentives. Elsewhere, it is expected that   construction can be a positive force in turning the economy around   in the months ahead. Oddly enough, tourism and leisure seem to be   one of the economy's strongest sectors. Cleveland, Atlanta, Kansas   City, and Minnesota all mention that industries catering to the   nation's taste for recreation have been remarkably resistant to the   recession. Capital expenditure plans of industry have been much less   buoyant. While the process of cutting capital spending may be   stabilizing, the outlook everywhere is, as Boston phrased it, ""lean."" Financial institutions throughout the country are facing the same   basic problem. Money is flowing into these intermediaries at a   record rate, but reinvestment alternatives are limited. By default,   the funds are being used to build liquidity because loan demand is   very weak. Virtually every District reports declining commercial and   retail loan demand. Inflation and unemployment also conform to the ""good news/bad news"" theme of these reports. There is widespread optimism that inflation   is being brought under control. Many examples of growing industrial   competition and price cutting are cited in the District reports.   There are also scattered reports of restraint in the prices of new   lines of seasonal consumer goods. Relatively few shortages still   remain. Kansas City forecasts that declining raw agricultural prices   may enable food prices to stabilize in the second half of 1975. The news on unemployment is less cheerful. The best that any   District Bank could say is that the situation is no worse.   Unemployment in most areas is still rising. It is especially severe   in New England, but even some urban areas of the Midwest are feeling   the pinch. Scattered reports of rehirings and fewer layoffs create   an impression that, at best, the indices may soon stabilize at their   current high levels. Overall, however, the central theme of the reports is one of hope—hope that inflation is slowing, that the inventory correction is   nearing completion, and that lower interest rates may stimulate   housing and business investment. There is also a suggestion that the ""hope"" itself is very important. While the reports relay skepticism   that recent tax legislation will have any significant economic   impact on the economy, there is some agreement that the   psychological effect of fiscal stimulation on consumer and business   confidence may be very important in turning the economy around."
1975-05-14,national,overall,"This month's Redbook reports provide several indications of   improvements in activity, but many sectors are still declining. A   widespread belief exists that the recession is ""bottoming out,"" and   that a turn for the better is near at hand. The words ""optimism"" and ""optimistic"" appear frequently. But an early return to full   prosperity is considered unlikely, and unemployment is expected to   remain high. Retail sales remain sluggish in virtually all regions.   Inventory liquidations are continuing, especially at the   manufacturing level. The rate of inflation continues to moderate.   Makers of many types of capital goods are cutting output, and others   are working off backlogs. Although residential activity is improving   moderately in some regions, new construction remains at a very   depressed level. A number of reports indicated that loan demand at   commercial banks has been soft, but this may reflect, in part,   highly selective lending policies. Agricultural prospects are   generally favorable, except for flooding rains in the South and   excess moisture in Iowa. This month's Redbook reports provide several indications of   improvements in activity, but many sectors are still declining. A   widespread belief exists that the recession is ""bottoming out,"" and   that a turn for the better is near at hand. The words ""optimism"" and ""optimistic"" appear frequently. But an early return to full   prosperity is considered unlikely, and unemployment is expected to   remain high. Retail sales remain sluggish in virtually all regions.   Inventory liquidations are continuing, especially at the   manufacturing level. The rate of inflation continues to moderate.   Makers of many types of capital goods are cutting output, and others   are working off backlogs. Although residential activity is improving   moderately in some regions, new construction remains at a very   depressed level. A number of reports indicated that loan demand at   commercial banks has been soft, but this may reflect, in part,   highly selective lending policies. Agricultural prospects are   generally favorable, except for flooding rains in the South and   excess moisture in Iowa. Most districts report that the rate of decline in activity has at   least slowed down. Improvements are reported for appliances and auto   tires (Cleveland), textiles and apparel (Richmond, Atlanta, and   Dallas), chemicals (St. Louis), and aircraft (San Francisco). New   York says many manufacturers are cutting output rather than prices.   Demand for autos and most consumer durables remains very weak,   inventory liquidations continue, and the capital expenditures boom   is ebbing. Virtually all districts commented on the continued poor performance   of retail sales. Auto deliveries fell back after the rebate programs   expired. New York and Philadelphia indicated that cold, rainy   weather had hurt sales of general merchandise recently, adding to   the effects of unemployment and adverse consumer psychology. A   number of districts attempted to assess the impact of the personal   tax rebates, but with inconclusive results. Chicago commented on   lagging sales of mobile homes, RVs, boats, and lawn and garden   equipment. Atlanta was impressed with ""unbelievably"" strong tourism.   A number of districts found that retailers had reduced inventories   to desired levels, but some additional cutting was in prospect if   sales did not improve.   Manufacturers' inventories remain generally excessive, except for   textiles and apparel, and substantial further overall liquidation   apparently is planned. San Francisco commented on very heavy   inventories of petroleum and copper. Several districts indicated   that steel mills are building inventories, while their customers are   liquidating, but the overall effect is a substantial slide in mill   shipments, output, and employment. No significant revival in steel   shipments is likely until late in the year, when auto and appliance   producers are expected to lead the recovery. Various districts reported that price inflation had slowed   significantly, with some wholesale and retail prices relatively   stable and others declining—see New York, Philadelphia, and   Chicago.  Cleveland and Chicago say that demand for equipment for coal mining,   energy exploration, pollution control, steel production, and water   and sewerage is very strong, but most other capital goods producers   have reduced output, more or less substantially. Electric utilities   and railroads are moderating capital outlays because of financial   stringencies. The picture for farm and construction equipment is   mixed. Heavy truck sales are dismal. Districts commenting on the   increase in the investment tax credit found it relatively   ineffective. Foreign demand for U. S. equipment is strong, partly   because of favorable exchange rates. The construction outlook remains gloomy, although Atlanta and St.   Louis report some improvement in the residential sector. Large   inflows of savings to S&Ls continue, but both homes buyers and   lenders remain cautious. San Francisco says new construction is at a ""standstill."" Districts commenting on the home purchase tax credit   see little impact, partly because of the complexities of the IRS   guidelines. Dallas suggests the tax credit is simply a ""windfall"" to   those who would have purchased homes anyway. Usury rates are   mentioned as a problem in Illinois and Minnesota. Atlanta reports   several bankruptcies of apartment complexes and mortgage companies   in Florida. A number of districts (Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and San   Francisco) note that mortgage lenders expect interest rates to rise   later in the year. Two districts discussed the ""crowding out"" effect   of heavy Treasury financial needs. Philadelphia says few bankers   believe demand for credit is being influenced by the prospective   federal deficit. Dallas, however, emphasizes ""crowding out"" as a   potent factor hindering efforts of business firms to raise funds in   the capital markets, which have become ""inaccessible."" Commercial   banks and other lenders have become highly selective in granting new   credits to all classes of borrowers, according to several districts."
1975-06-11,national,overall,"Business conditions showed signs of improvement in most parts of the   country, according to this month's Redbook reports. The rise in   unemployment appeared to have slowed, but joblessness was not   expected to decline soon. Retail sales revived noticeably in most   districts, led by seasonal merchandise and some consumer durables.   Retailers generally appeared to have achieved comfortable inventory   positions. Manufacturing activity continued to be weak, but there   were scattered signs of improvement. The inventory situation   improved for producers, but stocks were still above desired levels.   Automobile sales and residential construction remained sluggish.   Financial institutions continued to gain funds, and loan demand   remained almost uniformly weak. Agricultural conditions were   generally good across the nation. Business conditions showed signs of improvement in most parts of the   country, according to this month's Redbook reports. The rise in   unemployment appeared to have slowed, but joblessness was not   expected to decline soon. Retail sales revived noticeably in most   districts, led by seasonal merchandise and some consumer durables.   Retailers generally appeared to have achieved comfortable inventory   positions. Manufacturing activity continued to be weak, but there   were scattered signs of improvement. The inventory situation   improved for producers, but stocks were still above desired levels.   Automobile sales and residential construction remained sluggish.   Financial institutions continued to gain funds, and loan demand   remained almost uniformly weak. Agricultural conditions were   generally good across the nation. New hirings and worker recalls were cited as evidence of labor   market strength. However, new layoffs and labor force increases were   expected to keep unemployment rates high. Workers were being   recalled by several industries in the St. Louis and Atlanta   districts, and Richmond reported a significant increase in   manufacturing employment and hours worked. Despite the high level of   construction unemployment in Chicago—about 30 percent—building   trade unions won wage increases of 5 to 8 percent; in Dallas,   increases of 10 to 11 percent were won. Most districts reported a marked improvement in recent retail sales,   and retailers apparently felt they had largely re-established sound   inventory positions. A revival in consumer confidence, warmer   weather, vigorous sales promotions, and price cutting were all cited   as important stimulants. Almost none of the retail sales gain was   attributed to the tax rebates. Warmer weather was credited with   improving soft goods sales in Chicago, Boston, and Philadelphia.   Large appliances and furniture sold well in New York, Chicago, and   San Francisco. Automobile sales remained sluggish across the   country, except in the Atlanta region, where truck sales were   particularly strong. District reports on manufacturing activity were mixed. St. Louis,   Dallas, and Atlanta, for example, reported some improvement in the   sales of textiles and apparel. A Philadelphia survey indicated that   new orders were up for the first time since last September, and   Richmond reported a firming up in manufacturing shipments and new   orders. In the Cleveland district, the decline in manufacturing   activity decelerated in May. Respondents to a Minneapolis survey,   however, revised their 1975 sales expectations downward. Most durable goods sales were adversely affected by cutbacks in   capital spending. Capital goods producers in the Chicago area   reported cancellations and rescheduling of orders, while a few   encouraging signs in the capital spending sector were noted by   Cleveland. Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, and Dallas commented that   sales of oil field equipment were down because recent tax increases   had dampened oil companies' enthusiasm for drilling. Most respondents said manufacturers had made progress in cutting   inventories, but stocks in many cases still exceeded desired levels.   The Philadelphia and Richmond surveys, for example, found an   improved inventory situation, but further liquidation was expected. Recent gains in residential construction activity in most districts   were modest at best. For instance, new housing starts were up   slightly in Philadelphia, and new home sales improved somewhat in   Chicago. But the stock of unsold houses remained large in the   Atlanta district. Residential construction was also slow around St.   Louis, although commercial construction was proceeding more rapidly. New York attributed lagging construction activity to current   economic uncertainties and to continuing high construction costs.   Dallas and St. Louis said that mortgage lenders had been reluctant   to lower rates, thereby inhibiting a turnabout in residential   construction. Savings inflows at S&Ls continued to be strong, and time and savings   deposits were generally up at commercial banks. However, lending   policies remained cautious. Overall loan demand at both banks and   S&Ls was still sluggish; in the Richmond district, for instance,   commercial and industrial loan volume fell steadily in May. Consumer   loan demand also remained weak, in large part because of lagging   auto sales. Spring planting proceeded rapidly in the nation's corn belt in May.   Kansas City expressed concern that a bumper winter wheat harvest   might depress farm prices and incomes. Crop conditions were good   except in the Deep South where cotton planting was far behind normal   and in the areas of the West where cool weather had retarded growth."
1975-07-09,national,overall,"The decline in economic activity is over, but recovery will likely be protracted, according to this month's Redbook reports. Consumer spending continues to firm in most districts, on the strength of sales of nondurable goods. While retailers have managed to work off inventories to comfortable levels, some inventory liquidation continues in the manufacturing sector—particularly for producers' equipment. Labor markets have stabilized, and some workers that were laid off earlier in the year are expected to be recalled by the end of summer. Residential construction faces a long recovery even though mortgage lending is up in a few areas. Deposit flows continue strong at commercial banks, but loan demand remains weak. Bumper crops are expected in most areas of the nation, and farmers face a decline in grain and soybean prices this fall. The decline in economic activity is over, but recovery will likely be protracted, according to this month's Redbook reports. Consumer spending continues to firm in most districts, on the strength of sales of nondurable goods. While retailers have managed to work off inventories to comfortable levels, some inventory liquidation continues in the manufacturing sector—particularly for producers' equipment. Labor markets have stabilized, and some workers that were laid off earlier in the year are expected to be recalled by the end of summer. Residential construction faces a long recovery even though mortgage lending is up in a few areas. Deposit flows continue strong at commercial banks, but loan demand remains weak. Bumper crops are expected in most areas of the nation, and farmers face a decline in grain and soybean prices this fall. Most districts indicate that consumer spending continues to improve, primarily on the strength of nondurable goods sales. Although somewhat stronger, purchases of durable goods remain generally weak. San Francisco states consumers are still cautious and are unwilling to assume debt for big-ticket items. New car sales are up modestly but remain well below the year-earlier level. Foreign cars, on the other hand, are selling briskly, according to Atlanta. Spending for tourism and recreation is up substantially across the country. Retailers have managed to pare inventories to low levels and appear reluctant to rebuild stocks. In fact, New York and Dallas report some retailers may now be understocked, and Chicago reports increased sales would require retailers to restock. Manufacturers' inventories of consumer goods have for the most part been worked down to acceptable levels. But other manufacturers are continuing to run off stocks. Metals inventories remain excessive in New York and Atlanta, and manufacturers of producers' equipment are still liquidating inventories in Cleveland and Chicago. Prospects for industrial output are mixed. Capital goods production continues to fall with no near-term recovery in sight. The outlook for production on consumer goods, on the other hand, is more favorable. Because inventories are generally low at both retail and manufacturing levels, increased consumer spending should quickly result in stepped-up production. Although unemployment remains high, job markets appear more stable than in recent months. Kansas City's survey of purchasing agents, for example, reveals little change in manufacturing employment recently. Several districts report demand in some job categories appears to be firming. In Boston, companies are showing renewed interest in hiring personnel with business and technical skills. And Richmond reports over a third of the manufacturers surveyed have recently begun to rehire. In addition, the start up of production lines this summer will require worker recalls in both Chicago and Kansas City. While there are scattered reports of increased construction activity, home building remains weak throughout the country and will be slow to recover. High costs are the major deterrent to home buyers, according to Boston, New York, Chicago, and San  Francisco. Chicago and Dallas mention residential construction is being constrained in some cities by a lack of building sites, as land developers have been unable to obtain financing for these ventures. But New York and Atlanta report improved sales of new homes. In the Southeast, residential construction is on the upswing, largely because of government funding of military housing. And St. Louis and Minneapolis mortgage loan demand has turned up sharply. Deposit flows continue strong at commercial banks, but demand remains weak in most loan categories. According to Dallas and Philadelphia, loan demand is expected to remain sluggish throughout the summer. However, there are scattered reports that bank lending may be picking up. For example, St. Louis notes a rise in loan demand, and Kansas City states that lending for inventory accumulation has risen. San Francisco reports a growing demand for loans by utilities, transportation and energy companies, and the food industry. Bumper crops are expected in most areas of the country, although adverse weather has affected production in some states in the Richmond, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis Districts. According to Dallas, farmers fear increased production will lead to lower prices this fall. In the Kansas City District, farmers seem to be holding their wheat in anticipation of higher prices but will have to sell part of the crop before year-end to pay production expenses. A recovery in livestock prices has led to an increase in the number of cattle placed on feed."
1975-08-13,national,overall,"This month's Red Book District reports again suggest that the recession has come to an end and that recovery is under way. Assessments of the strength of the upswing vary, however. The majority of the respondents expect a gradual pickup in business activity. A somewhat more optimistic tone, however, emerges from some reports, particularly from those Districts where agriculture and the production of nondurable goods loom large. Retail sales, including auto sales, increased over the past month. The reduction in retail inventories apparently has largely run its course, a development that has been reflected in increased orders to and production by the consumer goods industries. The residential construction picture has improved moderately in some areas. The capital goods industry, however, remains depressed, with continued reduction in metal and machinery inventories. Crop prospects appear generally good, except in certain areas of the Midwest affected by drought or flooding. The demand for bank credit is generally described as weak, except for agricultural loans. This month's Red Book District reports again suggest that the recession has come to an end and that recovery is under way. Assessments of the strength of the upswing vary, however. The majority of the respondents expect a gradual pickup in business activity. A somewhat more optimistic tone, however, emerges from some reports, particularly from those Districts where agriculture and the production of nondurable goods loom large. Retail sales, including auto sales, increased over the past month. The reduction in retail inventories apparently has largely run its course, a development that has been reflected in increased orders to and production by the consumer goods industries. The residential construction picture has improved moderately in some areas. The capital goods industry, however, remains depressed, with continued reduction in metal and machinery inventories. Crop prospects appear generally good, except in certain areas of the Midwest affected by drought or flooding. The demand for bank credit is generally described as weak, except for agricultural loans. Regarding consumer spending, Boston reports a modest growth in such outlays, while retailers in the Philadelphia District look for a gradual upturn through the fall. Richmond and St. Louis report that retail sales continue to improve, but that sales of big ticket items remain weak. Kansas City, however, reports particularly strong sales of durable goods. Minneapolis reports that consumer spending has improved since last spring and that the outlook is for further expansion. About half of the Districts report increased auto sales, with particularly good performance reported by Atlanta, Kansas City, and Dallas. Heavy tourist traffic is reported by several Banks, including Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and San Francisco. The reduction of inventories at the retail level apparently has run its course. Indeed, several Banks including New York and Philadelphia report some actual or prospective rebuilding of inventories. Increased new orders, production, and shipments of consumer goods are reported by several Banks, including Cleveland, Richmond, Kansas City, and Dallas. And hand in hand with the increase in activity in the consumer goods sector, notably textiles and other soft goods, the employment situation in those industries has improved, as noted by Cleveland, Philadelphia, Richmond, and St. Louis, among others. On the darker side, the capital goods industry remains in the doldrums. Chicago thus notes that the less vigorous tone in that District compared with the nation reflects the relatively greater emphasis in that area on producers' goods. That Bank reports that order backlogs of capital goods producers continue to erode, that inventory liquidation at the manufacturing level continues in full swing, and that the demand for workers remains very weak. Similar observations are expressed by Cleveland, San Francisco, and Richmond, while Philadelphia characterizes capital spending plans as less than robust. There apparently has been some pickup in the construction of one-family homes, as reported by Atlanta and Chicago. On the other hand, commercial construction-apartments, condominiums, and nonresidential structures-remains weak in most areas. San Francisco notes that construction of all types is being hampered by high costs. Atlanta, however, reports the reactivation of several industrial building projects that had previously been shelved. There are scattered indications that concern is mounting over the possible development of shortages and over the resurgence of inflation as recovery gets under way. Concern over the shortage of natural gas was expressed by respondents in the San Francisco, Atlanta, and Cleveland Districts. Cleveland, moreover, reports that while most of its respondents in general do not expect shortages of materials and capacity to hamper the early state of recovery, a small minority do fear such an eventuality might rapidly develop. A similar view was expressed by purchasing managers in the Atlanta District and by some retailers in the Kansas City District. Regarding the fear of inflation, Philadelphia bankers were in general agreement that inflation remains a potential problem, and St. Louis notes that inflation has re-emerged as a major concern of businessmen as demand begins to pick up. Cleveland reports that several District directors expect the rate of inflation to accelerate. Reports from agricultural areas for the most part continue to point to good crops. However, several Districts-Chicago, St. Louis, and Kansas City-report crop damage from drought in some corn-producing areas, and Minneapolis reports flood damage to potato, sugar beet, and small grain crops. Chicago and San Francisco note that sales of grains to the USSR have put upward pressures on cereal prices. Cash receipts by farmers from sale of livestock and crops, however, were reported by Dallas to have fallen sharply."
1975-09-10,national,overall,"The tone of the Redbook this month can be described as ""cautiously optimistic."" Virtually every District reports that its economic slide has bottomed out and its economy is moving in a positive direction. The recovery process described by Boston and Chicago is still quite weak, while the rebound in Minneapolis and Dallas is somewhat more solid—though not robust. Unemployment rates are still very high, but this month's reports suggest distinct progress in most Districts. However, inflation shows some well-publicized signs of heating up again. An analysis of the national economy by sector produces an equally mixed picture. The manufacturing sector is weak but seems to show distinct signs of improvement. New orders are up and inventory stocks are down. Retailers report sales slightly above last year's levels, and tourism is rather strong. Current crop prospects in the agricultural sector are inconclusive, and farm earnings for the first six months of 1975 are below those of 1974. Construction is still very weak in most regions of the country. Bank lending to consumers is picking up, but commercial loan demand remains soft. Disintermediation is also showing signs of becoming troublesome in a few Districts. The tone of the Redbook this month can be described as ""cautiously optimistic."" Virtually every District reports that its economic slide has bottomed out and its economy is moving in a positive direction. The recovery process described by Boston and Chicago is still quite weak, while the rebound in Minneapolis and Dallas is somewhat more solid—though not robust. Unemployment rates are still very high, but this month's reports suggest distinct progress in most Districts. However, inflation shows some well-publicized signs of heating up again. An analysis of the national economy by sector produces an equally mixed picture. The manufacturing sector is weak but seems to show distinct signs of improvement. New orders are up and inventory stocks are down. Retailers report sales slightly above last year's levels, and tourism is rather strong. Current crop prospects in the agricultural sector are inconclusive, and farm earnings for the first six months of 1975 are below those of 1974. Construction is still very weak in most regions of the country. Bank lending to consumers is picking up, but commercial loan demand remains soft. Disintermediation is also showing signs of becoming troublesome in a few Districts. One of the most encouraging developments to surface in the reports this month is a brightening in the job markets across the nation. Many Districts report declining unemployment rates, albeit from very high levels. St. Louis reports that total employment is finally rising again in its region, and one Minneapolis director describes the labor market in a part of that District as ""tight."" Philadelphia, Richmond, and Dallas note a lengthening of the average workweek in their Districts. The outlook for inflation is not as encouraging. In varying degrees, most Districts report renewed concern over rising prices. Directors of the Minneapolis Bank see ""no widespread resurgence of rapid inflation"" for the present, but this confidence is not mirrored in the other reports. Richmond, New York, Chicago and San Francisco all note the anxiety of their respective business communities over the prospect of rekindled inflation. Despite substantial amounts of unused capacity, several basic manufacturing industries are reported to be raising prices. The fear of a reimposition of price controls is mentioned by San Francisco as a reason contributing to the recent price hikes. In most parts of the country manufacturing is starting an upswing. Richmond, Atlanta and Philadelphia all report higher levels of new manufacturing orders. Petroleum, chemicals and metals are strong in the Dallas District, while mining and pollution control equipment are bright spots for Chicago. The process of cutting inventories appears to be nearly over. The only consistently weak area in manufacturing is the capital goods sector, especially for New York and Chicago. Retail sales are a bit more encouraging. New York and Dallas both note that department store sales are quite strong in their regions. Auto sales are also showing gradual improvement. Richmond and New York also mention that the tourist business in those regions does not seem to have suffered much from the recession. The agricultural reports vary from region to region. Chicago is optimistic since recent rains have improved the chances for record crops in several states within that District. However, Kansas City reports that rainfall has come too late to help the fall crops in its area. Both Richmond and Kansas City report that cash receipts from farm marketings for the first half of 1975 were below levels posted a year ago in their regions. The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of the country. Atlanta, St. Louis and Minneapolis report marginal improvements in the health of that sector, but these areas are clearly the exception. The general picture is still one of weak or sluggish markets for single-family housing and very depressed markets for multifamily units. Nonresidential construction is also badly depressed. The dual culprits are reported to be high construction costs and uncertainty about future mortgage rates and financing. The situation of the country's banking community has changed little in the last few weeks. Loan demand is generally weak, with the exception of consumer loans which are showing some life in Richmond, St. Louis and Kansas City. Boston notes that loan officers in its area are still ""occupied with a lot of workouts."" The picture on deposit flows is rather mixed with some Districts reporting net inflows while others report mild outflows. Disintermediation is not yet a serious problem, but several Banks mention concern in their regions that it could become serious. Kansas City and St. Louis both indicate that the possibility of future disintermediation may be a drag on recovery of the housing industry."
1975-10-21,national,overall,"The general tone of this month's REDBOOK reports is somewhat less confident. Virtually all districts note improvement in conditions, but there are frequent mentions of unsatisfactory gains. Retail sales have increased, but mainly in soft goods with consumers showing continued caution on big-ticket purchases. Inventory adjustments are largely completed at the retail level (unless sales recede again), but many manufacturers plan further liquidations. General price inflation continues, despite weakness in some commodities, and there are fears that increases in the price level will accelerate. References to weak job markets do not seem commensurate with the substantial gains in employment reported for the nation. Unemployment remains at depressingly high levels in all districts. Reports on capital expenditures suggest further weakness, overall.  Construction activity has shown no sign of revival except for single-family homes. Fears of substantial disintermediation are slowing new loan commitments by thrift institutions. Business loan demand at commercial banks remains sluggish for the most part. Harvests of major agricultural crops have been generally very good, but Hurricane Eloise caused extensive damage in some parts of the South. The general tone of this month's REDBOOK reports is somewhat less confident. Virtually all districts note improvement in conditions, but there are frequent mentions of unsatisfactory gains. Retail sales have increased, but mainly in soft goods with consumers showing continued caution on big-ticket purchases. Inventory adjustments are largely completed at the retail level (unless sales recede again), but many manufacturers plan further liquidations. General price inflation continues, despite weakness in some commodities, and there are fears that increases in the price level will accelerate. References to weak job markets do not seem commensurate with the substantial gains in employment reported for the nation. Unemployment remains at depressingly high levels in all districts. Reports on capital expenditures suggest further weakness, overall.  Construction activity has shown no sign of revival except for single-family homes. Fears of substantial disintermediation are slowing new loan commitments by thrift institutions. Business loan demand at commercial banks remains sluggish for the most part. Harvests of major agricultural crops have been generally very good, but Hurricane Eloise caused extensive damage in some parts of the South. Boston's report indicates widespread discouragement with economic trends and emphasizes ""hazards"" to business. Richmond finds the improvement ""less widespread,"" and San Francisco says the recovery is ""slower than expected."" Most districts sound some notes of caution. Perhaps the strongest pictures are presented by Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Dallas. Retail sales have improved modestly in most districts, mainly in apparel and other nondurables. Only Dallas reports a ""marked pickup"" in big-ticket items. However, Minneapolis, St. Louis, and Dallas find that auto dealers are pleased with the reception accorded 1976 models. Chicago and Philadelphia say that consumer credit delinquencies have been reduced. The inventory correction continues. Most districts draw a contrast between manufacturers' continued efforts to reduce inventories and the success of retailers in bringing stocks into line with anticipated sales. Cleveland emphasizes the continued overhang of steel inventories, and Kansas City points up the recent stocking of steel to beat the October 1 price increase. Needs to replenish depleted inventories account for much of the increase in output of chemicals and textiles since last spring. Continuing price inflation remains a major consideration almost everywhere. Cost-push inflation reflects rising labor costs, higher prices for energy, outlays to control pollution, and high interest charges. New York observers see inflation in the 6 to 8 percent range and some fear a ""reacceleration."" None of the districts reported views that the inflation rate would slow substantially next year. Dallas and Philadelphia report a significant rise in manufacturing employment and in the average workweek. But Chicago finds that demand for workers continues weak, and Minneapolis says manufacturing employment declined further in the summer. The weakest job market appears to be in New England where unemployment increased to 12 percent in August. Most districts reported that capital expenditure prospects appear soft for the next several months at least. Cleveland says capital goods orders have strengthened, but from ""very low levels"" last spring. Chicago says most manufacturers of capital goods and components are still cutting output, but demand for large mining and earth moving equipment remains strong. Richmond says 40 percent of manufacturers consider capacity ""excessive."" Dallas reports a very high level of oil and gas exploration in proven fields, but riskier ventures have been deemphasized and exploratory offshore drilling is at a ""virtual standstill."" San Francisco reports weak orders for commercial aircraft and reductions in investment plans for aluminum and lumber. Sales and construction of single-family homes have improved this year throughout the nation, and added gains are expected in 1976 if credit conditions permit. But slowing inflows of funds to thrift institutions constitute a threat to further recovery. New apartment building is at very low levels. Office space is in excess supply with Atlanta reporting a vacancy rate of 20 percent. Chicago says architects have ""nothing on the shelf or the boards."" Atlanta comments at length on the damage done to crops and buildings by Hurricane Eloise and the associated adverse impact on tourism. New York observers are apprehensive over the spreading impact of the financial problems of New York City. Unsettled conditions in the municipal bond markets have ""virtually halted"" major new commitments on government construction projects throughout the state."
1975-11-12,national,overall,"The economy has continued to recover, according to this month's Redbook reports, but the recovery has been uneven due to a persistent sluggishness in several regions and industries. Retail sales improved this fall, and retailers expect a good holiday season. With some exceptions, manufacturing activity has improved in recent weeks, but building activity has remained off nationwide, and business loan demand has been slow in most districts. Opinions vary concerning effects of a possible default by New York City. Favorable weather conditions have resulted in better than expected crop yields in many areas. The economy has continued to recover, according to this month's Redbook reports, but the recovery has been uneven due to a persistent sluggishness in several regions and industries. Retail sales improved this fall, and retailers expect a good holiday season. With some exceptions, manufacturing activity has improved in recent weeks, but building activity has remained off nationwide, and business loan demand has been slow in most districts. Opinions vary concerning effects of a possible default by New York City. Favorable weather conditions have resulted in better than expected crop yields in many areas. The nation's retailers were generally optimistic about their holiday sales prospects because of improved retail sales this fall. However, their optimism was guarded, resulting in tight inventory policies. Consumers were still usually characterized as ""trading down"" or hunting"" and as being ""quality conscious"" and ""exceptionally cautious."" Retailers in the Boston and Cleveland districts experienced disappointing sales this fall and were therefore less optimistic about holiday sales than their counterparts in other districts. For example, a November survey by the Richmond bank indicated substantial sales gains and the first increase in sales of big-ticket items in over a year. Sales of big-ticket items, except furniture, remained weak in most other districts, while clothing was apparently selling well nationwide. Automobile sales presented a mixed picture,  with sales increases reported by St. Louis, San Francisco, and Minneapolis. The two latter districts also noted an improvement in truck sales. New York indicated that the new small cars met with a good reception, while the reverse was true in Kansas City. Despite a slight increase in new car sales, Cleveland noted a lack of enthusiasm for the new 1976 models. Present inventory positions were regarded as satisfactory by most retailers, and caution had prompted only modest restocking. Retailers in several districts stated that they preferred the risk of running out of some goods rather than facing an overstocked position after Christmas. Prices were reportedly steady to increasing slightly in most districts, although retailers in Philadelphia noted some easing in prices. Although reports varied, manufacturing activity appeared to be slowly recovering. Surveys by Richmond and Philadelphia indicated improvement, and St. Louis, San Francisco, and Cleveland stated that manufacturing shipments had advanced. Other indicators also denoted better conditions. Richmond, for example, found that inventories had been brought into line with sales. Chicago, however, pointed out that many manufacturers were still cutting inventories but indicated some stocks appeared to be ""approaching leanness."" Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Richmond reported increases in manufacturing employment, but Chicago indicated few companies were actively hiring. Furthermore, while Philadelphia indicated capital expenditures by manufacturers were beginning to pick up, several districts said capital goods producers and steel producers were experiencing continued difficulties. Construction continued to be depressed nationwide, although St. Louis noted a substantial increase in building of single-family units. There was little evidence of a recovery in nonresidential construction. Most districts reported that business loan demand was slow, though seasonal lending needs were up in some districts. Kansas City and Dallas attributed flat loan demand to the moderate pace of inventory rebuilding, while Philadelphia cited present excess industrial capacity and substantial corporate liquidity. Boston and Philadelphia both anticipated little significant increase in loan demand for the next three to six months. Banks were divided in their assessments of a possible default by New York City. Chicago and Kansas City expected the impacts would be relatively minor, and many San Francisco directors felt the market had largely discounted the default. Boston, however, believed that a constructive workout prior to default would save ""some anguish"" and that the Administration had ""underestimated the wrangling, chaos, and cash drain that default would entail."" New York said its district was being adversely affected by the city's difficulties, though directors within the New York district were split in their assessments of the impacts of default. The nation's harvest had been nearing completion ahead of schedule under near-perfect weather conditions. Yields had been better than expected in many areas, and Dallas, Richmond, San Francisco, and Minneapolis were among the districts noting improved farm income prospects. Kansas City and Dallas stated that there had been a sharp upturn in cattle feeding, and Atlanta said that the movement of range livestock to market had been progressing at a record pace."
1975-12-10,national,overall,"The economy continues to recover but at a lackluster pace. Stepped up consumer spending is providing the primary stimulus for continued growth. Retail sales have improved, and Christmas buying is expected to be strong. In addition, new car sales are well above year-earlier levels. Industrial production has leveled off as new orders have slowed and some inventory liquidation continues, particularly in durable goods industries. Recovery, however, is evident in some nondurable goods industries. The demand for labor is generally weak, and construction is depressed except for some modest pickup in single-family housing starts. Loan demand at commercial banks remains flat, and no substantial rebound is expected in the near term. Lower grain prices have provided greater incentive to increase livestock production. The economy continues to recover but at a lackluster pace. Stepped up consumer spending is providing the primary stimulus for continued growth. Retail sales have improved, and Christmas buying is expected to be strong. In addition, new car sales are well above year-earlier levels. Industrial production has leveled off as new orders have slowed and some inventory liquidation continues, particularly in durable goods industries. Recovery, however, is evident in some nondurable goods industries. The demand for labor is generally weak, and construction is depressed except for some modest pickup in single-family housing starts. Loan demand at commercial banks remains flat, and no substantial rebound is expected in the near term. Lower grain prices have provided greater incentive to increase livestock production. Retail sales have quickened, and merchants are generally expecting a strong Christmas season. The improvement, according to San Francisco, is attributed to a diminution in the rate of price increases for general merchandise and improved consumer confidence. Philadelphia, Atlanta, St. Louis, and Minneapolis report durable goods are selling well; but Richmond, Cleveland, and Chicago note sales of household goods remain sluggish. November sales were held down by unseasonably warm weather, according to New York and Chicago, and Atlanta reports department store sales are weak in Florida. Auto sales are up substantially over year-earlier levels but remain well below the rates of two or three years ago. The pace of overall manufacturing has slackened, and a return to a robust rate of production is not generally expected in the near term. The inflow of new orders has slowed, and some inventory liquidations continue, particularly in durable goods industries. New orders and shipments have fallen for the first time since midyear, according to Philadelphia. Chicago reports steel shipments are off, and some major projects to expand steel capacity in the Midwest are being re-evaluated. The rise in manufacturing employment and the average factory workweek has leveled off, especially in the eastern half of the country. The recovery in capital goods production is uneven according to Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis. Producers in some depressed industries voiced optimism about a turnaround early next year. While production is off in durable goods industries, some nondurable goods industries have staged strong recoveries. Cleveland, St. Louis, and Dallas cite impressive gains in the output of petrochemicals and related products. And apparel manufacturers have experienced a sharp increase in new orders according to New York and Dallas. The strength of labor markets differs markedly from district to district. In the Southwest, the unemployment rate has dropped below 7 percent. The jobless rates in two New England states, by contrast, are double that rate. Cleveland also reports virtually no improvement in employment since the recessionary low last spring. And job markets in Georgia and Florida continue to deteriorate. Bankers report a pickup in deposit inflows and a flat loan demand, especially for business loans. Kansas City reports a sharp falloff in loan requests from national accounts. Interest rates on business loans have edged downward according to St. Louis and Richmond. A slow recovery in loan demand is expected over the next three months by Philadelphia and Richmond. And Boston sees a pickup in business loan demand coming in late spring. Residential construction remains weak in most areas, particularly for multi-family housing. Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco note a revival in single-family starts. Home buying has picked up as mortgage rates have stabilized with a steady inflow of deposits at savings institutions. Both Philadelphia and Cleveland report active markets for existing housing. Kansas City finds no buyer resistance to present interest rates and, like Philadelphia, sees no pressures that would increase rates before March. Nonresidential construction continues at a low level, as many manufacturers regard their current production capacities as adequate. Dallas reports the sluggish pace of nonresidential construction has curtailed the output of construction steel. San Francisco, however, notes some new projects have been undertaken recently. In addition, construction in the Atlanta area will receive a boost when work begins on a new rapid transit system. A bumper harvest has led to a decline in grain prices. San Francisco reports farmers are complaining about the embargo on grain sales to Russia since these commodities are expected to be in heavy surplus. The reduction in grain prices, however, has provided greater incentive to increase livestock production according to St. Louis. Kansas City states the current trend in farm prices should lead to greater stability in food prices in the months ahead."
1976-01-14,national,overall,"
This month's Red Book reports suggest that economic activity is continuing to expand, but that the upward impetus is narrowly based. The most optimistic sector is retail trade, where Christmas sales as well as automobile sales in several Districts were stronger than expected. However, only a modest recovery in inventory spending is anticipated as retailers maintain tight inventory control and as some durable manufacturers continue to trim excessive stocks. Caution characterizes the capital spending outlook, with weakness expected in some sizable industries. Led by activity in the single-family area, construction is generally expected to continue its modest rate of recovery. Although most respondents did not foresee any near-term acceleration in inflation, some concern was expressed over construction costs and the outcome of the heavier bargainingcalendar in 1976. One favorable aspect of the price outlook comes from the agricultural sector where there are generally expected to be increased supplies of pork and beef. Loan demand at commercial banks is generally expected to remain sluggish.
Strong gains in consumer spending were reported throughout the twelve Districts. Sales far exceeded expectations in several districts including New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas. Very strong sales were reported even in some areas in the Boston and Cleveland districts where high unemployment was expected to have adverse effects on consumer buying. Some reluctance toward the purchase of ""big-ticket"" items was reported in New York and Richmond, but Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Minneapolis all reported increases in this category. Auto sales were surprisingly strong in Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, while tourism was thriving in both the Atlanta and the Minneapolis Districts.
While the brisk pace of retail activity has significantly pared stocks, some progress remains to be made in trimming manufacturing inventories. For example, respondents from the Atlanta, Boston, and Chicago Districts reported that Christmas sales were so strong that stocks are now fairly low. However, retailers and purchasing managers in the Minneapolis and Kansas City Districts foresaw fears of overstocking as motivating tight inventory control policies. At the manufacturing level, respondents in the Philadelphia and Richmond Districts noted that durable manufacturing inventory liquidation had yet to be completed. Purchasing agents from the Kansas City District suggested that the rather modest outlook for inflation for most products precluded much in the way of speculative buildups. In view of these considerations, the typical outlook was for only a moderate first-half upturn in inventory spending.
A large measure of caution seems to surround the prospects for a recovery in capital spending in 1976. For example, respondents in the New York and Chicago Districts among others did not foresee more than a modest recovery until at least the second half of the year. One of the problems emphasized in the Dallas and Cleveland Districts was the considerable proportion of capital expenditures represented by pollution abatement requirements in the petroleum refining and steel industries. In the energy sector, Dallas respondents report that fixed investment in the drilling area remains strong. However, investment in petroleum refining is expected to be below last year's level reflecting, in part, refiners' expectations that higher petroleum costs will result in a long-term flattening out in demand for many refinery products. In the San Francisco District another sizable area of concern was the aircraft industry where a decline in new orders for commercial jets has prompted a significant cutback in plant and equipment expenditures for 1976.
Construction and real estate activity remain generally depressed, although there were a few signs of strengthening. Atlanta and Minneapolis both report continued sluggishness in new residential construction but increased interest in the existing housing stock. San Francisco reports that the anticipated improvement in residential construction has not yet materialized. St. Louis presents a somewhat brighter picture, reporting a strengthening in single-family dwellings as well as in non-residential construction. Chicago and Dallas also report a continued improvement in residential construction activity. But commercial construction, with few exceptions, is still weak. Also, a large number of condominiums remain vacant in the Atlanta District, and the construction of 
multi-family dwellings in the St. Louis District is at a virtual   standstill. In a number of Districts, however, sizable inflows to   thrift institutions and the possibility of mortgage interest rate   declines were cited.    

Reports from agricultural areas are generally favorable. Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City all expect increases in hog production and pork supplies. Improved conditions for cattle producers are anticipated in the Atlanta District as they are in Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. Only the Dallas District is somewhat pessimistic, expecting placements of fed cattle to fall as their prices continue declining. Minneapolis reports cash farm receipts were up from the first half of the year, led by record prices for dairy products. Cash receipts for grain, however, were below 1974 levels.
The widespread remaining slack in manufacturing coupled with the generally expected near-term sluggishness of capital spending and rather modest inventory rebuilding were often mentioned as factors holding down inflation at least over the first half of the year. Nevertheless, the possibility of uncomfortably large price increases in some sectors was recognized by some respondents. For example, a Cleveland director reported sharply rising costs for concrete and lumber, while one of the nation's largest homebuilders expected a 10 percent rise in new home prices in 1976. Respondents in the Cleveland District also reported that the October 1 rise in steel prices appeared to be sticking fairly well, although divergent views were expressed elsewhere on the firmness of the aluminum price increase. Some concern was voiced over the possible price impact of the potential terms of settlements of major wage negotiations in 1976.
A rather broad consensus emerged that loan demand was weak and that no strong near-term recovery was in the offing. A number of respondents cited tighter inventory control policies as a major reason for the prospective sluggishness in loan demand. Reflecting this outlook, bankers in the Philadelphia District expected the prime rate to edge down somewhat further before starting to move up gradually beginning in the second quarter. Bankers from the Boston and San Francisco Districts, among others, emphasized the much increased concern over quality of credit. With respect to bank earnings, these bankers foresaw a weak profit picture for 1976.
 
This month's Red Book reports suggest that economic activity is continuing to expand, but that the upward impetus is narrowly based. The most optimistic sector is retail trade, where Christmas sales as well as automobile sales in several Districts were stronger than expected. However, only a modest recovery in inventory spending is anticipated as retailers maintain tight inventory control and as some durable manufacturers continue to trim excessive stocks. Caution characterizes the capital spending outlook, with weakness expected in some sizable industries. Led by activity in the single-family area, construction is generally expected to continue its modest rate of recovery. Although most respondents did not foresee any near-term acceleration in inflation, some concern was expressed over construction costs and the outcome of the heavier bargainingcalendar in 1976. One favorable aspect of the price outlook comes from the agricultural sector where there are generally expected to be increased supplies of pork and beef. Loan demand at commercial banks is generally expected to remain sluggish.
Strong gains in consumer spending were reported throughout the twelve Districts. Sales far exceeded expectations in several districts including New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas. Very strong sales were reported even in some areas in the Boston and Cleveland districts where high unemployment was expected to have adverse effects on consumer buying. Some reluctance toward the purchase of ""big-ticket"" items was reported in New York and Richmond, but Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Minneapolis all reported increases in this category. Auto sales were surprisingly strong in Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, while tourism was thriving in both the Atlanta and the Minneapolis Districts.
While the brisk pace of retail activity has significantly pared stocks, some progress remains to be made in trimming manufacturing inventories. For example, respondents from the Atlanta, Boston, and Chicago Districts reported that Christmas sales were so strong that stocks are now fairly low. However, retailers and purchasing managers in the Minneapolis and Kansas City Districts foresaw fears of overstocking as motivating tight inventory control policies. At the manufacturing level, respondents in the Philadelphia and Richmond Districts noted that durable manufacturing inventory liquidation had yet to be completed. Purchasing agents from the Kansas City District suggested that the rather modest outlook for inflation for most products precluded much in the way of speculative buildups. In view of these considerations, the typical outlook was for only a moderate first-half upturn in inventory spending.
A large measure of caution seems to surround the prospects for a recovery in capital spending in 1976. For example, respondents in the New York and Chicago Districts among others did not foresee more than a modest recovery until at least the second half of the year. One of the problems emphasized in the Dallas and Cleveland Districts was the considerable proportion of capital expenditures represented by pollution abatement requirements in the petroleum refining and steel industries. In the energy sector, Dallas respondents report that fixed investment in the drilling area remains strong. However, investment in petroleum refining is expected to be below last year's level reflecting, in part, refiners' expectations that higher petroleum costs will result in a long-term flattening out in demand for many refinery products. In the San Francisco District another sizable area of concern was the aircraft industry where a decline in new orders for commercial jets has prompted a significant cutback in plant and equipment expenditures for 1976.
Construction and real estate activity remain generally depressed, although there were a few signs of strengthening. Atlanta and Minneapolis both report continued sluggishness in new residential construction but increased interest in the existing housing stock. San Francisco reports that the anticipated improvement in residential construction has not yet materialized. St. Louis presents a somewhat brighter picture, reporting a strengthening in single-family dwellings as well as in non-residential construction. Chicago and Dallas also report a continued improvement in residential construction activity. But commercial construction, with few exceptions, is still weak. Also, a large number of condominiums remain vacant in the Atlanta District, and the construction of 
multi-family dwellings in the St. Louis District is at a virtual   standstill. In a number of Districts, however, sizable inflows to   thrift institutions and the possibility of mortgage interest rate   declines were cited.    

Reports from agricultural areas are generally favorable. Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City all expect increases in hog production and pork supplies. Improved conditions for cattle producers are anticipated in the Atlanta District as they are in Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. Only the Dallas District is somewhat pessimistic, expecting placements of fed cattle to fall as their prices continue declining. Minneapolis reports cash farm receipts were up from the first half of the year, led by record prices for dairy products. Cash receipts for grain, however, were below 1974 levels.
The widespread remaining slack in manufacturing coupled with the generally expected near-term sluggishness of capital spending and rather modest inventory rebuilding were often mentioned as factors holding down inflation at least over the first half of the year. Nevertheless, the possibility of uncomfortably large price increases in some sectors was recognized by some respondents. For example, a Cleveland director reported sharply rising costs for concrete and lumber, while one of the nation's largest homebuilders expected a 10 percent rise in new home prices in 1976. Respondents in the Cleveland District also reported that the October 1 rise in steel prices appeared to be sticking fairly well, although divergent views were expressed elsewhere on the firmness of the aluminum price increase. Some concern was voiced over the possible price impact of the potential terms of settlements of major wage negotiations in 1976.
A rather broad consensus emerged that loan demand was weak and that no strong near-term recovery was in the offing. A number of respondents cited tighter inventory control policies as a major reason for the prospective sluggishness in loan demand. Reflecting this outlook, bankers in the Philadelphia District expected the prime rate to edge down somewhat further before starting to move up gradually beginning in the second quarter. Bankers from the Boston and San Francisco Districts, among others, emphasized the much increased concern over quality of credit. With respect to bank earnings, these bankers foresaw a weak profit picture for 1976.
 This month's Red Book reports suggest that economic activity is continuing to expand, but that the upward impetus is narrowly based. The most optimistic sector is retail trade, where Christmas sales as well as automobile sales in several Districts were stronger than expected. However, only a modest recovery in inventory spending is anticipated as retailers maintain tight inventory control and as some durable manufacturers continue to trim excessive stocks. Caution characterizes the capital spending outlook, with weakness expected in some sizable industries. Led by activity in the single-family area, construction is generally expected to continue its modest rate of recovery. Although most respondents did not foresee any near-term acceleration in inflation, some concern was expressed over construction costs and the outcome of the heavier bargainingcalendar in 1976. One favorable aspect of the price outlook comes from the agricultural sector where there are generally expected to be increased supplies of pork and beef. Loan demand at commercial banks is generally expected to remain sluggish. Strong gains in consumer spending were reported throughout the twelve Districts. Sales far exceeded expectations in several districts including New York, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas. Very strong sales were reported even in some areas in the Boston and Cleveland districts where high unemployment was expected to have adverse effects on consumer buying. Some reluctance toward the purchase of ""big-ticket"" items was reported in New York and Richmond, but Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Minneapolis all reported increases in this category. Auto sales were surprisingly strong in Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and San Francisco, while tourism was thriving in both the Atlanta and the Minneapolis Districts. While the brisk pace of retail activity has significantly pared stocks, some progress remains to be made in trimming manufacturing inventories. For example, respondents from the Atlanta, Boston, and Chicago Districts reported that Christmas sales were so strong that stocks are now fairly low. However, retailers and purchasing managers in the Minneapolis and Kansas City Districts foresaw fears of overstocking as motivating tight inventory control policies. At the manufacturing level, respondents in the Philadelphia and Richmond Districts noted that durable manufacturing inventory liquidation had yet to be completed. Purchasing agents from the Kansas City District suggested that the rather modest outlook for inflation for most products precluded much in the way of speculative buildups. In view of these considerations, the typical outlook was for only a moderate first-half upturn in inventory spending. A large measure of caution seems to surround the prospects for a recovery in capital spending in 1976. For example, respondents in the New York and Chicago Districts among others did not foresee more than a modest recovery until at least the second half of the year. One of the problems emphasized in the Dallas and Cleveland Districts was the considerable proportion of capital expenditures represented by pollution abatement requirements in the petroleum refining and steel industries. In the energy sector, Dallas respondents report that fixed investment in the drilling area remains strong. However, investment in petroleum refining is expected to be below last year's level reflecting, in part, refiners' expectations that higher petroleum costs will result in a long-term flattening out in demand for many refinery products. In the San Francisco District another sizable area of concern was the aircraft industry where a decline in new orders for commercial jets has prompted a significant cutback in plant and equipment expenditures for 1976. Construction and real estate activity remain generally depressed, although there were a few signs of strengthening. Atlanta and Minneapolis both report continued sluggishness in new residential construction but increased interest in the existing housing stock. San Francisco reports that the anticipated improvement in residential construction has not yet materialized. St. Louis presents a somewhat brighter picture, reporting a strengthening in single-family dwellings as well as in non-residential construction. Chicago and Dallas also report a continued improvement in residential construction activity. But commercial construction, with few exceptions, is still weak. Also, a large number of condominiums remain vacant in the Atlanta District, and the construction of  
 Reports from agricultural areas are generally favorable. Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Kansas City all expect increases in hog production and pork supplies. Improved conditions for cattle producers are anticipated in the Atlanta District as they are in Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. Only the Dallas District is somewhat pessimistic, expecting placements of fed cattle to fall as their prices continue declining. Minneapolis reports cash farm receipts were up from the first half of the year, led by record prices for dairy products. Cash receipts for grain, however, were below 1974 levels. The widespread remaining slack in manufacturing coupled with the generally expected near-term sluggishness of capital spending and rather modest inventory rebuilding were often mentioned as factors holding down inflation at least over the first half of the year. Nevertheless, the possibility of uncomfortably large price increases in some sectors was recognized by some respondents. For example, a Cleveland director reported sharply rising costs for concrete and lumber, while one of the nation's largest homebuilders expected a 10 percent rise in new home prices in 1976. Respondents in the Cleveland District also reported that the October 1 rise in steel prices appeared to be sticking fairly well, although divergent views were expressed elsewhere on the firmness of the aluminum price increase. Some concern was voiced over the possible price impact of the potential terms of settlements of major wage negotiations in 1976. A rather broad consensus emerged that loan demand was weak and that no strong near-term recovery was in the offing. A number of respondents cited tighter inventory control policies as a major reason for the prospective sluggishness in loan demand. Reflecting this outlook, bankers in the Philadelphia District expected the prime rate to edge down somewhat further before starting to move up gradually beginning in the second quarter. Bankers from the Boston and San Francisco Districts, among others, emphasized the much increased concern over quality of credit. With respect to bank earnings, these bankers foresaw a weak profit picture for 1976."
1976-02-11,national,overall,"
Strong retail sales are the key to a generally optimistic outlook for the Redbook this month. Nearly every District focuses attention on the strength of consumer demand as an indication that the economy may be regaining some of the momentum it lost in the latter months of 1975. The picture is still far from rosy, but the outlook is distinctly more optimistic. Even though capital goods industries are still weak, the rest of the manufacturing sector is gaining strength. Inventories have been brought into line with sales and new orders are up. Two persistent weak spots—the construction industry's slump and high urban unemployment—remain gloomy, but inflationary pressures seem to be moderating in several Districts. While there is little disagreement that ""catch-up"" efforts in wage negotiations scheduled for 1976 pose a problem for stabilizing production costs, there are differences of opinion on the likelihood that food prices will rise significantly during the next few months. The financial sector continues to build liquidity rather than expand. Savings are flowing into commercial banks and thrift institutions at very rapid rates. This is putting downward pressure on mortgage rates. However, despite low interest rates for business loans, demand for credit remains sluggish.
Reports from 10 of the 12 Districts indicate that the surge of retail sales experienced in December was no fluke. In each case, the bulk of the gains recorded at the end of 1975 were preserved through January. ""Big-ticket"" items are leading the sales surge in most areas. Cars, trucks, appliances and furniture are all selling well. Chicago, Philadelphia and Minneapolis note that apparel sales are also strong. In general, retailers appear to have their inventories at levels which they feel are sustainable and are increasing their stocks only to the extent needed to meet revised sales forecasts.
The manufacturing sector continues its upswing. Cleveland notes that steel producers are experiencing a gradual recovery while Kansas City and Chicago both point to rising sales forecasts as a spur to automobile production in their Districts. In most industries manufacturing inventories are now either in line with sales or nearly so. Dallas reflects the findings of most District Banks in reporting that business continues to be reluctant to rebuild inventories now that stocks have been cut back. The manufacturing sector's advances seem to be most hesitant in the Richmond District. That region had experienced substantial improvement in late 1975, but this month's report indicates a retrenchment may be occurring. New orders and backlogs both softened during January in that District. Capital goods manufacturers have yet to participate fully in the recovery, and in the Boston District capital goods orders are still ""feeble."" St. Louis and Minneapolis report similar weakness. Cleveland describes farm machinery and mining equipment as ""holding up well,"" while Richmond's machinery and equipment group is one of the few sectors showing progress in that region.
The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of the country. Residential and nonresidential construction activity were both lower last quarter in the Cleveland District, and Boston's real estate and housing markets remain ""depressed."" Atlanta finds itself with very large amounts of vacant office space that resulted from overbuilding. However, the city is trying to turn substantial recent additions to its hotel room capacity into a plus by searching for more convention business. The San Francisco District reports that its stock of unsold housing and high building costs are continuing to discourage new residential construction even though mortgage rates are dropping.
There has been relatively little progress so far in reducing the nation's unemployment problem. Chicago finds that ""job markets are improving gradually but unemployment remains very burdensome in the inner cities."" St. Louis finds its region in a similar situation. The Dallas region is one of the few in the country where the problem is not severe. Increasing job opportunities in the oil industry have helped to bring the area's unemployment rate below 6 percent. By contrast, San Francisco reports the opposite problem since its area's aircraft industry is once again badly depressed and its employment is dropping.
The best that can be said of inflation is that it may be moderating. Prices continue to rise virtually everywhere, but no District reports any unusual increases. New York and Kansas City both note predictions from sources in their Districts that food prices will be declining in the months ahead—courtesy of good harvests, heavy plantings and intensified preparation of livestock for meat production. The Chicago District report, however, disputes this forecast. New York, Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis all mention the concern that ""catch-up"" raises will be the objective of 1976 wage bargaining.
The current outlook for agriculture is mixed. With the exception of soybeans, forecasts call for planting additional acreage in most major crops. The outlook for 1976 crop harvests at this point is generally positive. However, farm income is currently under pressure because of declining grain prices. According to the Minneapolis report, the price decline is also resulting in slow debt repayment and requests for additional inventory financing at rural banks.
The situation of the country's banking community has not changed substantially in recent weeks. Savings inflows are generally strong, while business loan demand continues to be weak. For instance, Richmond reports that some of the banks in its District are experiencing unusually low levels of credit line utilization. Even aggressive loan pricing efforts (Philadelphia) are producing little new business. The Dallas District banks seem to be relatively busy with agricultural and consumer loans. But despite the comparative strength of that region's economy, commercial loan growth is described as ""lackluster."" The only development of significance is the downward pressure that savings inflows are putting on mortgage rates, especially in thrift institutions. Boston, Cleveland and Chicago all report declining financing costs for mortgage loans.
 
Strong retail sales are the key to a generally optimistic outlook for the Redbook this month. Nearly every District focuses attention on the strength of consumer demand as an indication that the economy may be regaining some of the momentum it lost in the latter months of 1975. The picture is still far from rosy, but the outlook is distinctly more optimistic. Even though capital goods industries are still weak, the rest of the manufacturing sector is gaining strength. Inventories have been brought into line with sales and new orders are up. Two persistent weak spots—the construction industry's slump and high urban unemployment—remain gloomy, but inflationary pressures seem to be moderating in several Districts. While there is little disagreement that ""catch-up"" efforts in wage negotiations scheduled for 1976 pose a problem for stabilizing production costs, there are differences of opinion on the likelihood that food prices will rise significantly during the next few months. The financial sector continues to build liquidity rather than expand. Savings are flowing into commercial banks and thrift institutions at very rapid rates. This is putting downward pressure on mortgage rates. However, despite low interest rates for business loans, demand for credit remains sluggish.
Reports from 10 of the 12 Districts indicate that the surge of retail sales experienced in December was no fluke. In each case, the bulk of the gains recorded at the end of 1975 were preserved through January. ""Big-ticket"" items are leading the sales surge in most areas. Cars, trucks, appliances and furniture are all selling well. Chicago, Philadelphia and Minneapolis note that apparel sales are also strong. In general, retailers appear to have their inventories at levels which they feel are sustainable and are increasing their stocks only to the extent needed to meet revised sales forecasts.
The manufacturing sector continues its upswing. Cleveland notes that steel producers are experiencing a gradual recovery while Kansas City and Chicago both point to rising sales forecasts as a spur to automobile production in their Districts. In most industries manufacturing inventories are now either in line with sales or nearly so. Dallas reflects the findings of most District Banks in reporting that business continues to be reluctant to rebuild inventories now that stocks have been cut back. The manufacturing sector's advances seem to be most hesitant in the Richmond District. That region had experienced substantial improvement in late 1975, but this month's report indicates a retrenchment may be occurring. New orders and backlogs both softened during January in that District. Capital goods manufacturers have yet to participate fully in the recovery, and in the Boston District capital goods orders are still ""feeble."" St. Louis and Minneapolis report similar weakness. Cleveland describes farm machinery and mining equipment as ""holding up well,"" while Richmond's machinery and equipment group is one of the few sectors showing progress in that region.
The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of the country. Residential and nonresidential construction activity were both lower last quarter in the Cleveland District, and Boston's real estate and housing markets remain ""depressed."" Atlanta finds itself with very large amounts of vacant office space that resulted from overbuilding. However, the city is trying to turn substantial recent additions to its hotel room capacity into a plus by searching for more convention business. The San Francisco District reports that its stock of unsold housing and high building costs are continuing to discourage new residential construction even though mortgage rates are dropping.
There has been relatively little progress so far in reducing the nation's unemployment problem. Chicago finds that ""job markets are improving gradually but unemployment remains very burdensome in the inner cities."" St. Louis finds its region in a similar situation. The Dallas region is one of the few in the country where the problem is not severe. Increasing job opportunities in the oil industry have helped to bring the area's unemployment rate below 6 percent. By contrast, San Francisco reports the opposite problem since its area's aircraft industry is once again badly depressed and its employment is dropping.
The best that can be said of inflation is that it may be moderating. Prices continue to rise virtually everywhere, but no District reports any unusual increases. New York and Kansas City both note predictions from sources in their Districts that food prices will be declining in the months ahead—courtesy of good harvests, heavy plantings and intensified preparation of livestock for meat production. The Chicago District report, however, disputes this forecast. New York, Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis all mention the concern that ""catch-up"" raises will be the objective of 1976 wage bargaining.
The current outlook for agriculture is mixed. With the exception of soybeans, forecasts call for planting additional acreage in most major crops. The outlook for 1976 crop harvests at this point is generally positive. However, farm income is currently under pressure because of declining grain prices. According to the Minneapolis report, the price decline is also resulting in slow debt repayment and requests for additional inventory financing at rural banks.
The situation of the country's banking community has not changed substantially in recent weeks. Savings inflows are generally strong, while business loan demand continues to be weak. For instance, Richmond reports that some of the banks in its District are experiencing unusually low levels of credit line utilization. Even aggressive loan pricing efforts (Philadelphia) are producing little new business. The Dallas District banks seem to be relatively busy with agricultural and consumer loans. But despite the comparative strength of that region's economy, commercial loan growth is described as ""lackluster."" The only development of significance is the downward pressure that savings inflows are putting on mortgage rates, especially in thrift institutions. Boston, Cleveland and Chicago all report declining financing costs for mortgage loans.
 Strong retail sales are the key to a generally optimistic outlook for the Redbook this month. Nearly every District focuses attention on the strength of consumer demand as an indication that the economy may be regaining some of the momentum it lost in the latter months of 1975. The picture is still far from rosy, but the outlook is distinctly more optimistic. Even though capital goods industries are still weak, the rest of the manufacturing sector is gaining strength. Inventories have been brought into line with sales and new orders are up. Two persistent weak spots—the construction industry's slump and high urban unemployment—remain gloomy, but inflationary pressures seem to be moderating in several Districts. While there is little disagreement that ""catch-up"" efforts in wage negotiations scheduled for 1976 pose a problem for stabilizing production costs, there are differences of opinion on the likelihood that food prices will rise significantly during the next few months. The financial sector continues to build liquidity rather than expand. Savings are flowing into commercial banks and thrift institutions at very rapid rates. This is putting downward pressure on mortgage rates. However, despite low interest rates for business loans, demand for credit remains sluggish. Reports from 10 of the 12 Districts indicate that the surge of retail sales experienced in December was no fluke. In each case, the bulk of the gains recorded at the end of 1975 were preserved through January. ""Big-ticket"" items are leading the sales surge in most areas. Cars, trucks, appliances and furniture are all selling well. Chicago, Philadelphia and Minneapolis note that apparel sales are also strong. In general, retailers appear to have their inventories at levels which they feel are sustainable and are increasing their stocks only to the extent needed to meet revised sales forecasts. The manufacturing sector continues its upswing. Cleveland notes that steel producers are experiencing a gradual recovery while Kansas City and Chicago both point to rising sales forecasts as a spur to automobile production in their Districts. In most industries manufacturing inventories are now either in line with sales or nearly so. Dallas reflects the findings of most District Banks in reporting that business continues to be reluctant to rebuild inventories now that stocks have been cut back. The manufacturing sector's advances seem to be most hesitant in the Richmond District. That region had experienced substantial improvement in late 1975, but this month's report indicates a retrenchment may be occurring. New orders and backlogs both softened during January in that District. Capital goods manufacturers have yet to participate fully in the recovery, and in the Boston District capital goods orders are still ""feeble."" St. Louis and Minneapolis report similar weakness. Cleveland describes farm machinery and mining equipment as ""holding up well,"" while Richmond's machinery and equipment group is one of the few sectors showing progress in that region. The construction industry remains in the doldrums throughout much of the country. Residential and nonresidential construction activity were both lower last quarter in the Cleveland District, and Boston's real estate and housing markets remain ""depressed."" Atlanta finds itself with very large amounts of vacant office space that resulted from overbuilding. However, the city is trying to turn substantial recent additions to its hotel room capacity into a plus by searching for more convention business. The San Francisco District reports that its stock of unsold housing and high building costs are continuing to discourage new residential construction even though mortgage rates are dropping. There has been relatively little progress so far in reducing the nation's unemployment problem. Chicago finds that ""job markets are improving gradually but unemployment remains very burdensome in the inner cities."" St. Louis finds its region in a similar situation. The Dallas region is one of the few in the country where the problem is not severe. Increasing job opportunities in the oil industry have helped to bring the area's unemployment rate below 6 percent. By contrast, San Francisco reports the opposite problem since its area's aircraft industry is once again badly depressed and its employment is dropping. The best that can be said of inflation is that it may be moderating. Prices continue to rise virtually everywhere, but no District reports any unusual increases. New York and Kansas City both note predictions from sources in their Districts that food prices will be declining in the months ahead—courtesy of good harvests, heavy plantings and intensified preparation of livestock for meat production. The Chicago District report, however, disputes this forecast. New York, Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis all mention the concern that ""catch-up"" raises will be the objective of 1976 wage bargaining. The current outlook for agriculture is mixed. With the exception of soybeans, forecasts call for planting additional acreage in most major crops. The outlook for 1976 crop harvests at this point is generally positive. However, farm income is currently under pressure because of declining grain prices. According to the Minneapolis report, the price decline is also resulting in slow debt repayment and requests for additional inventory financing at rural banks. The situation of the country's banking community has not changed substantially in recent weeks. Savings inflows are generally strong, while business loan demand continues to be weak. For instance, Richmond reports that some of the banks in its District are experiencing unusually low levels of credit line utilization. Even aggressive loan pricing efforts (Philadelphia) are producing little new business. The Dallas District banks seem to be relatively busy with agricultural and consumer loans. But despite the comparative strength of that region's economy, commercial loan growth is described as ""lackluster."" The only development of significance is the downward pressure that savings inflows are putting on mortgage rates, especially in thrift institutions. Boston, Cleveland and Chicago all report declining financing costs for mortgage loans."
1976-03-10,national,overall,"
The picture that emerges from virtually all of this month's District reports is one of a resumption of a vigorous upswing in the economy following its pause late last year. Strong retail sales, including autos and other durable goods as well as nondurables, are reported by most Districts. Business inventories with a few exceptions are now in line with sales, and some restocking is getting under way, notably at the retail level, but also, if to a modest extent, at the manufacturing level. The residential construction outlook continues to brighten in several areas, although commercial and industrial construction generally remain sluggish. Against this background, the employment picture has been improving. Business attitudes towards capital expenditures, however, continue cautious. The outlook for the 1976 crop year is mixed. The demand for bank credit generally remains flat.
Virtually all Districts report further advances in the pace of consumer spending, with retail sales variously characterized as healthy, brisk, and stronger than expected. This trend, moreover, is generally expected to continue over the coming months, with a good Easter season in the offing and, as reported by one Bank (Philadelphia), with expectations that fall will be better than spring. Particularly encouraging were reports by most Banks that the improvement has been shared by both soft and hard goods. Across the board increases, broad-based strength, and dramatic improvement in major household appliance sales are mentioned in several reports (including Cleveland, Chicago, Richmond, and St. Louis). Strength in auto sales is mentioned in about half of the reports, and most 
reports touching on car sales take note of the recent shift in   demand from smaller to larger models. An auto industry economist in   the Cleveland District has raised his estimate of 1976 sales of new   domestic cars to 8.5 million units.    

The strength in retail sales has improved the inventory picture at both the retail and the manufacturing level. Retail inventories are generally found in good shape and at or below desired levels, and a number of Banks report moderate efforts by retailers to rebuild depleted stocks (Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis). Cleveland, however, reports that retailers are not expected to build inventories until late this year. At the manufacturing level, Philadelphia reports that inventory liquidation has given way to a modest accumulation, while Dallas reports a rebuilding of chemical inventories by users, and a build-up of finished goods by producers. A strengthening in the demand for steel, aluminum, lumber products, and similar basic products is noted by some Banks (Cleveland, San Francisco, and St. Louis).
The gradual improvement in residential construction that had already begun to emerge in some areas continued in evidence over the past month, with a number of Banks reporting increased building activity (including Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco). The improvement, however, as yet remains largely concentrated in single-family building (although Atlanta also reports an improved outlook for apartment building). Industrial and commercial construction have yet to show convincing signs of a revival.
The picture in the capital goods industry has brightened somewhat over the period but in general business outlays for plant and equipment continue to lag the recovery. Among others, Cleveland notes that while there has been some pick-up in orders of equipment from depressed 1975 levels, respondents in that District do not expect a sharp recovery until 1977; manufacturers in the Richmond District view plant capacity as still excessive; and Chicago reports the outlook for capital goods to be mixed.
The increased tempo of business activity finds its counterpart in a generally improved employment picture, with increased hirings and/or declining unemployment mentioned by a number of Banks (including Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, and Chicago). More restrained reports, however, emanate from Boston and New York.
Reports from agricultural Districts regarding the outlook for 1976 crops are mixed. Kansas City and Dallas note substantial drought and wind damage to the winter wheat crop, but the former indicates that timely precipitation could improve production prospects considerably. Minneapolis reports that most of the District's agriculture has not been affected by drought, and prospects for a good winter wheat crop in the St. Louis District are reported excellent.
Most Banks report the demand for commercial bank loans in general continues flat, in part reflecting the higher level of corporate liquidity. Respondents in a number of Districts, however, note scattered evidence of some strengthening in loan demand (including Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City), and some mention expectations of a pick-up as the year progresses. Deposit inflows at thrift institutions generally remain good, and some increase in mortgage loan demand is noted.
 
The picture that emerges from virtually all of this month's District reports is one of a resumption of a vigorous upswing in the economy following its pause late last year. Strong retail sales, including autos and other durable goods as well as nondurables, are reported by most Districts. Business inventories with a few exceptions are now in line with sales, and some restocking is getting under way, notably at the retail level, but also, if to a modest extent, at the manufacturing level. The residential construction outlook continues to brighten in several areas, although commercial and industrial construction generally remain sluggish. Against this background, the employment picture has been improving. Business attitudes towards capital expenditures, however, continue cautious. The outlook for the 1976 crop year is mixed. The demand for bank credit generally remains flat.
Virtually all Districts report further advances in the pace of consumer spending, with retail sales variously characterized as healthy, brisk, and stronger than expected. This trend, moreover, is generally expected to continue over the coming months, with a good Easter season in the offing and, as reported by one Bank (Philadelphia), with expectations that fall will be better than spring. Particularly encouraging were reports by most Banks that the improvement has been shared by both soft and hard goods. Across the board increases, broad-based strength, and dramatic improvement in major household appliance sales are mentioned in several reports (including Cleveland, Chicago, Richmond, and St. Louis). Strength in auto sales is mentioned in about half of the reports, and most 
reports touching on car sales take note of the recent shift in   demand from smaller to larger models. An auto industry economist in   the Cleveland District has raised his estimate of 1976 sales of new   domestic cars to 8.5 million units.    

The strength in retail sales has improved the inventory picture at both the retail and the manufacturing level. Retail inventories are generally found in good shape and at or below desired levels, and a number of Banks report moderate efforts by retailers to rebuild depleted stocks (Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis). Cleveland, however, reports that retailers are not expected to build inventories until late this year. At the manufacturing level, Philadelphia reports that inventory liquidation has given way to a modest accumulation, while Dallas reports a rebuilding of chemical inventories by users, and a build-up of finished goods by producers. A strengthening in the demand for steel, aluminum, lumber products, and similar basic products is noted by some Banks (Cleveland, San Francisco, and St. Louis).
The gradual improvement in residential construction that had already begun to emerge in some areas continued in evidence over the past month, with a number of Banks reporting increased building activity (including Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco). The improvement, however, as yet remains largely concentrated in single-family building (although Atlanta also reports an improved outlook for apartment building). Industrial and commercial construction have yet to show convincing signs of a revival.
The picture in the capital goods industry has brightened somewhat over the period but in general business outlays for plant and equipment continue to lag the recovery. Among others, Cleveland notes that while there has been some pick-up in orders of equipment from depressed 1975 levels, respondents in that District do not expect a sharp recovery until 1977; manufacturers in the Richmond District view plant capacity as still excessive; and Chicago reports the outlook for capital goods to be mixed.
The increased tempo of business activity finds its counterpart in a generally improved employment picture, with increased hirings and/or declining unemployment mentioned by a number of Banks (including Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, and Chicago). More restrained reports, however, emanate from Boston and New York.
Reports from agricultural Districts regarding the outlook for 1976 crops are mixed. Kansas City and Dallas note substantial drought and wind damage to the winter wheat crop, but the former indicates that timely precipitation could improve production prospects considerably. Minneapolis reports that most of the District's agriculture has not been affected by drought, and prospects for a good winter wheat crop in the St. Louis District are reported excellent.
Most Banks report the demand for commercial bank loans in general continues flat, in part reflecting the higher level of corporate liquidity. Respondents in a number of Districts, however, note scattered evidence of some strengthening in loan demand (including Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City), and some mention expectations of a pick-up as the year progresses. Deposit inflows at thrift institutions generally remain good, and some increase in mortgage loan demand is noted.
 The picture that emerges from virtually all of this month's District reports is one of a resumption of a vigorous upswing in the economy following its pause late last year. Strong retail sales, including autos and other durable goods as well as nondurables, are reported by most Districts. Business inventories with a few exceptions are now in line with sales, and some restocking is getting under way, notably at the retail level, but also, if to a modest extent, at the manufacturing level. The residential construction outlook continues to brighten in several areas, although commercial and industrial construction generally remain sluggish. Against this background, the employment picture has been improving. Business attitudes towards capital expenditures, however, continue cautious. The outlook for the 1976 crop year is mixed. The demand for bank credit generally remains flat. Virtually all Districts report further advances in the pace of consumer spending, with retail sales variously characterized as healthy, brisk, and stronger than expected. This trend, moreover, is generally expected to continue over the coming months, with a good Easter season in the offing and, as reported by one Bank (Philadelphia), with expectations that fall will be better than spring. Particularly encouraging were reports by most Banks that the improvement has been shared by both soft and hard goods. Across the board increases, broad-based strength, and dramatic improvement in major household appliance sales are mentioned in several reports (including Cleveland, Chicago, Richmond, and St. Louis). Strength in auto sales is mentioned in about half of the reports, and most  
 The strength in retail sales has improved the inventory picture at both the retail and the manufacturing level. Retail inventories are generally found in good shape and at or below desired levels, and a number of Banks report moderate efforts by retailers to rebuild depleted stocks (Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and St. Louis). Cleveland, however, reports that retailers are not expected to build inventories until late this year. At the manufacturing level, Philadelphia reports that inventory liquidation has given way to a modest accumulation, while Dallas reports a rebuilding of chemical inventories by users, and a build-up of finished goods by producers. A strengthening in the demand for steel, aluminum, lumber products, and similar basic products is noted by some Banks (Cleveland, San Francisco, and St. Louis). The gradual improvement in residential construction that had already begun to emerge in some areas continued in evidence over the past month, with a number of Banks reporting increased building activity (including Atlanta, St. Louis, and San Francisco). The improvement, however, as yet remains largely concentrated in single-family building (although Atlanta also reports an improved outlook for apartment building). Industrial and commercial construction have yet to show convincing signs of a revival. The picture in the capital goods industry has brightened somewhat over the period but in general business outlays for plant and equipment continue to lag the recovery. Among others, Cleveland notes that while there has been some pick-up in orders of equipment from depressed 1975 levels, respondents in that District do not expect a sharp recovery until 1977; manufacturers in the Richmond District view plant capacity as still excessive; and Chicago reports the outlook for capital goods to be mixed. The increased tempo of business activity finds its counterpart in a generally improved employment picture, with increased hirings and/or declining unemployment mentioned by a number of Banks (including Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, and Chicago). More restrained reports, however, emanate from Boston and New York. Reports from agricultural Districts regarding the outlook for 1976 crops are mixed. Kansas City and Dallas note substantial drought and wind damage to the winter wheat crop, but the former indicates that timely precipitation could improve production prospects considerably. Minneapolis reports that most of the District's agriculture has not been affected by drought, and prospects for a good winter wheat crop in the St. Louis District are reported excellent. Most Banks report the demand for commercial bank loans in general continues flat, in part reflecting the higher level of corporate liquidity. Respondents in a number of Districts, however, note scattered evidence of some strengthening in loan demand (including Richmond, St. Louis, and Kansas City), and some mention expectations of a pick-up as the year progresses. Deposit inflows at thrift institutions generally remain good, and some increase in mortgage loan demand is noted."
1976-04-14,national,overall,"The recent surge in consumer spending is broadly based. Auto sales   and ""big ticket"" items are reported to be selling well and exceeding   expectations, according to nearly all District reports. New York   describes the consumer as being less price conscious. Atlanta   reports tourism is ""booming"" on the east coast of Florida and   advance bookings for central Florida are heavy. Several Districts   commented that retailers are bullish with respect to prospects   through 1976. The recent surge in consumer spending is broadly based. Auto sales   and ""big ticket"" items are reported to be selling well and exceeding   expectations, according to nearly all District reports. New York   describes the consumer as being less price conscious. Atlanta   reports tourism is ""booming"" on the east coast of Florida and   advance bookings for central Florida are heavy. Several Districts   commented that retailers are bullish with respect to prospects   through 1976. Tight control seems to keynote comments concerning retail and   manufacturing inventories. Higher consumer spending has yet to be   translated into higher inventories. Retailers are apparently   cautious with respect to building stocks and they are more likely to   err on the low side, although a large department store chain will   apparently boost its inventory. Low inventories for controls,   motors, and timber have strengthened orders for those products,   while tire production has been boosted because of an anticipated   work stoppage in the rubber industry as well as low stocks relative   to sales. Manufacturers' stocks are still excessive, according to   the Richmond survey, but the latest survey conducted by Philadelphia   indicates that about one-half of the respondents plan to build their   inventories over the next 6 months. Chicago notes beginnings of   inventory buildup of purchased materials and components, while New   York expects cautious rebuilding of inventories that will accelerate   with recovery in capital goods. Manufacturing activity continues to strengthen, despite the lack of   thrust from capital goods. Forecasts of steel output for 1976 are   being adjusted upward as a result of completion of inventory   liquidation and better than expected auto, truck and appliance   production, according to Chicago and Cleveland. Atlanta reports   allocation of certain types of steel in the third quarter is likely.   Considerable uncertainty and caution mark comments with respect to   capital goods. New York and Boston see little evidence of recovery   while Chicago, Cleveland and Richmond see some pickup in orders for   non-electrical equipment and machinery, Cleveland reports machine   tool orders continue to rise gradually, while higher than expected   orders for printing equipment, bearings, and certain types of   construction machinery have led to upward revision in forecasts for   those industries. A broad pickup in capital goods is not expected   until late 1976 or early 1977, according to Chicago and San   Francisco. Construction continues to be marked by strong demand for single-family housing. Multifamily housing and nonresidential construction   remain weak throughout much of the country. Demand for new single-family housing appears strongest in the Southwest, the Midwest, and   Southeast. In other areas, however, the market appears strongest for   existing houses, and only limited or moderate recovery in new   housing is reported. Multifamily construction remains depressed,   although scattered positive signs are appearing in some areas. There   is very little evidence of a pickup in industrial construction, and   St. Louis reports only scattered increases in activity in   nonresidential construction. Reports from agricultural areas suggest conditions are favorable   despite drought and an early freeze that could affect crop output.   St. Louis, Minneapolis and Richmond report spring planting is ahead   of normal in several areas. St. Louis describes prospects for the   winter wheat crop as ""excellent."" although Kansas City expects   output this year will be off by about 20 percent from last year.   Expected increases in spring wheat production coupled with a large   carryover of stocks from the last crop year are expected to offset   some of the decline. Kansas City expects that expansion of red meat   supplies during the second half of 1976 will constrain livestock   prices, despite recent strengthening. Pork and beef output is   expected to be about 2 to 3 percent above 1975 levels. Weak business loan demand is continuing throughout the country, but   consumer and mortgage loans have been strengthening in several   Districts. Philadelphia reports that some banks are more   aggressively encouraging customers to use existing lines of credit,   while some larger banks in the St. Louis District are offering loans   at below the prime rate to larger business customers. Bankers in   Philadelphia do not expect loan volume to increase until the third   or fourth quarter. Sluggish loan demand is associated with ample   corporate liquidity and rate spreads between the prime rate and   commercial paper, according to San Francisco, St. Louis and Kansas   City."
1976-05-12,national,overall,"
This month's District reports suggest that the overall recovery is continuing at about the same rate as during recent months. Sales of consumer goods remain generally strong throughout the country, although there are scattered indications of some moderation of consumer demand. Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Several industrial Districts report further increases in orders and shipments and lengthened delivery schedules. Conditions are particularly tight in the steel industry. Despite the continued improvement of sales and output, most Districts indicate that both retailers and manufacturers are following cautious inventory policies. Reports regarding the outlook for business fixed investment continue to be mixed, but there are signs of increasing strength in this sector in the industrial Midwest and Southeast. Most Districts report further moderate increases in single-family home building but continued weakness in multi-family unit construction. Agricultural conditions are generally favorable, with crop plantings either on or ahead of schedule. Although consumer and farm loans are increasing in several Districts, business loan demand remains stagnant throughout the country.
Consumer spending remains the strongest force sustaining the recovery. The reports of several Districts, including Boston, Richmond, and St. Louis, suggest that consumer demand for big-ticket durable items is now expanding rapidly. Automobile sales are strong throughout the country. New car demand appears to be centered increasingly on large domestic models. Subcompact sales are sagging. Although retail sales remain buoyant overall, there are scattered reports of weakness. Philadelphia reports a recent slump in carpet sales. Both Cleveland and Chicago indicate that television sets are moving slowly, and Kansas City reports sluggish sales of durable goods in some areas.
Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Manufacturers surveyed by the Philadelphia and Richmond Banks indicated increases in orders and shipments, and several Districts report lengthened delivery schedules. Increased appliance and automobile production has greatly increased the demand for flat-rolled steel. Cleveland indicates that steel producers in the Fourth District are presently operating at about 90 percent of capacity compared to 70 percent earlier this year. Chicago suggests that steel shortages might arise later in the year if capital goods manufacturers increase their demand for steel. The generally increased demand for industrial goods has contributed to recent increases in the prices of key industrial commodities. Several Districts report that businessmen expect an acceleration of industrial price increases as the year progresses.
Despite the continued recovery of sales, inventory restocking is proceeding cautiously in most areas at both the retail and manufacturing levels. Philadelphia, Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco indicate that factory inventories have remained flat in recent weeks. Some retailers in the Richmond and Kansas City Districts reported stocks at higher than desired levels.
Although the outlook for business capital spending remains uncertain, several Districts indicate favorable developments. Atlanta reports numerous recent announcements of new plants to be constructed in Alabama and Tennessee. Cleveland reports a sharp upsurge in the demand for heavy-duty trucks, bearings, and machine tools. Chicago suggests a growing belief that margins of unused industrial capacity may have been overestimated. In contrast, however, Boston reports little change in orders for producers' durables.
Comments regarding residential construction follow the pattern of recent months. Construction of single-family housing continues to increase at a moderate pace in most Districts, and the outlook in this sector is generally favorable. Multi-family unit construction remains sluggish, although St. Louis reports improved prospects for multi-family building in the St. Louis metropolitan area.
Most Districts report favorable agricultural prospects. Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis indicate that crop plantings are on or ahead of schedule in their Districts. Kansas City reports that recent rainfall has broken the drought in that area and substantially improved winter wheat crop prospects. Kansas City expects the high prospective level of grain stocks to assist in holding retail food prices to their smallest increase since 1972. Agricultural conditions in the Southeast are less favorable than elsewhere. Atlanta reports that dry and cold weather has damaged cotton crops in some areas.
While consumer and agricultural loan demand has increased in some Districts, no District reports any increase in business loan demand. Philadelphia and St. Louis report that prime business borrowers can obtain money at rates below the announced prime rate. Inflows of funds into thrift institutions have remained strong. Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis report that thrifts are seeking to reduce these inflows by reducing rates paid on longer-term savings certificates, and Cleveland indicates that thrifts would like to reduce passbook rates. Mortgage rates have declined to the 8 1/2 - 8 3/4 level in recent weeks in several Districts.
 
This month's District reports suggest that the overall recovery is continuing at about the same rate as during recent months. Sales of consumer goods remain generally strong throughout the country, although there are scattered indications of some moderation of consumer demand. Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Several industrial Districts report further increases in orders and shipments and lengthened delivery schedules. Conditions are particularly tight in the steel industry. Despite the continued improvement of sales and output, most Districts indicate that both retailers and manufacturers are following cautious inventory policies. Reports regarding the outlook for business fixed investment continue to be mixed, but there are signs of increasing strength in this sector in the industrial Midwest and Southeast. Most Districts report further moderate increases in single-family home building but continued weakness in multi-family unit construction. Agricultural conditions are generally favorable, with crop plantings either on or ahead of schedule. Although consumer and farm loans are increasing in several Districts, business loan demand remains stagnant throughout the country.
Consumer spending remains the strongest force sustaining the recovery. The reports of several Districts, including Boston, Richmond, and St. Louis, suggest that consumer demand for big-ticket durable items is now expanding rapidly. Automobile sales are strong throughout the country. New car demand appears to be centered increasingly on large domestic models. Subcompact sales are sagging. Although retail sales remain buoyant overall, there are scattered reports of weakness. Philadelphia reports a recent slump in carpet sales. Both Cleveland and Chicago indicate that television sets are moving slowly, and Kansas City reports sluggish sales of durable goods in some areas.
Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Manufacturers surveyed by the Philadelphia and Richmond Banks indicated increases in orders and shipments, and several Districts report lengthened delivery schedules. Increased appliance and automobile production has greatly increased the demand for flat-rolled steel. Cleveland indicates that steel producers in the Fourth District are presently operating at about 90 percent of capacity compared to 70 percent earlier this year. Chicago suggests that steel shortages might arise later in the year if capital goods manufacturers increase their demand for steel. The generally increased demand for industrial goods has contributed to recent increases in the prices of key industrial commodities. Several Districts report that businessmen expect an acceleration of industrial price increases as the year progresses.
Despite the continued recovery of sales, inventory restocking is proceeding cautiously in most areas at both the retail and manufacturing levels. Philadelphia, Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco indicate that factory inventories have remained flat in recent weeks. Some retailers in the Richmond and Kansas City Districts reported stocks at higher than desired levels.
Although the outlook for business capital spending remains uncertain, several Districts indicate favorable developments. Atlanta reports numerous recent announcements of new plants to be constructed in Alabama and Tennessee. Cleveland reports a sharp upsurge in the demand for heavy-duty trucks, bearings, and machine tools. Chicago suggests a growing belief that margins of unused industrial capacity may have been overestimated. In contrast, however, Boston reports little change in orders for producers' durables.
Comments regarding residential construction follow the pattern of recent months. Construction of single-family housing continues to increase at a moderate pace in most Districts, and the outlook in this sector is generally favorable. Multi-family unit construction remains sluggish, although St. Louis reports improved prospects for multi-family building in the St. Louis metropolitan area.
Most Districts report favorable agricultural prospects. Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis indicate that crop plantings are on or ahead of schedule in their Districts. Kansas City reports that recent rainfall has broken the drought in that area and substantially improved winter wheat crop prospects. Kansas City expects the high prospective level of grain stocks to assist in holding retail food prices to their smallest increase since 1972. Agricultural conditions in the Southeast are less favorable than elsewhere. Atlanta reports that dry and cold weather has damaged cotton crops in some areas.
While consumer and agricultural loan demand has increased in some Districts, no District reports any increase in business loan demand. Philadelphia and St. Louis report that prime business borrowers can obtain money at rates below the announced prime rate. Inflows of funds into thrift institutions have remained strong. Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis report that thrifts are seeking to reduce these inflows by reducing rates paid on longer-term savings certificates, and Cleveland indicates that thrifts would like to reduce passbook rates. Mortgage rates have declined to the 8 1/2 - 8 3/4 level in recent weeks in several Districts.
 This month's District reports suggest that the overall recovery is continuing at about the same rate as during recent months. Sales of consumer goods remain generally strong throughout the country, although there are scattered indications of some moderation of consumer demand. Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Several industrial Districts report further increases in orders and shipments and lengthened delivery schedules. Conditions are particularly tight in the steel industry. Despite the continued improvement of sales and output, most Districts indicate that both retailers and manufacturers are following cautious inventory policies. Reports regarding the outlook for business fixed investment continue to be mixed, but there are signs of increasing strength in this sector in the industrial Midwest and Southeast. Most Districts report further moderate increases in single-family home building but continued weakness in multi-family unit construction. Agricultural conditions are generally favorable, with crop plantings either on or ahead of schedule. Although consumer and farm loans are increasing in several Districts, business loan demand remains stagnant throughout the country. Consumer spending remains the strongest force sustaining the recovery. The reports of several Districts, including Boston, Richmond, and St. Louis, suggest that consumer demand for big-ticket durable items is now expanding rapidly. Automobile sales are strong throughout the country. New car demand appears to be centered increasingly on large domestic models. Subcompact sales are sagging. Although retail sales remain buoyant overall, there are scattered reports of weakness. Philadelphia reports a recent slump in carpet sales. Both Cleveland and Chicago indicate that television sets are moving slowly, and Kansas City reports sluggish sales of durable goods in some areas. Manufacturing activity appears to be accelerating. Manufacturers surveyed by the Philadelphia and Richmond Banks indicated increases in orders and shipments, and several Districts report lengthened delivery schedules. Increased appliance and automobile production has greatly increased the demand for flat-rolled steel. Cleveland indicates that steel producers in the Fourth District are presently operating at about 90 percent of capacity compared to 70 percent earlier this year. Chicago suggests that steel shortages might arise later in the year if capital goods manufacturers increase their demand for steel. The generally increased demand for industrial goods has contributed to recent increases in the prices of key industrial commodities. Several Districts report that businessmen expect an acceleration of industrial price increases as the year progresses. Despite the continued recovery of sales, inventory restocking is proceeding cautiously in most areas at both the retail and manufacturing levels. Philadelphia, Richmond, Dallas, and San Francisco indicate that factory inventories have remained flat in recent weeks. Some retailers in the Richmond and Kansas City Districts reported stocks at higher than desired levels. Although the outlook for business capital spending remains uncertain, several Districts indicate favorable developments. Atlanta reports numerous recent announcements of new plants to be constructed in Alabama and Tennessee. Cleveland reports a sharp upsurge in the demand for heavy-duty trucks, bearings, and machine tools. Chicago suggests a growing belief that margins of unused industrial capacity may have been overestimated. In contrast, however, Boston reports little change in orders for producers' durables. Comments regarding residential construction follow the pattern of recent months. Construction of single-family housing continues to increase at a moderate pace in most Districts, and the outlook in this sector is generally favorable. Multi-family unit construction remains sluggish, although St. Louis reports improved prospects for multi-family building in the St. Louis metropolitan area. Most Districts report favorable agricultural prospects. Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis indicate that crop plantings are on or ahead of schedule in their Districts. Kansas City reports that recent rainfall has broken the drought in that area and substantially improved winter wheat crop prospects. Kansas City expects the high prospective level of grain stocks to assist in holding retail food prices to their smallest increase since 1972. Agricultural conditions in the Southeast are less favorable than elsewhere. Atlanta reports that dry and cold weather has damaged cotton crops in some areas. While consumer and agricultural loan demand has increased in some Districts, no District reports any increase in business loan demand. Philadelphia and St. Louis report that prime business borrowers can obtain money at rates below the announced prime rate. Inflows of funds into thrift institutions have remained strong. Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis report that thrifts are seeking to reduce these inflows by reducing rates paid on longer-term savings certificates, and Cleveland indicates that thrifts would like to reduce passbook rates. Mortgage rates have declined to the 8 1/2 - 8 3/4 level in recent weeks in several Districts."
1976-06-16,national,overall,"Continuing expansion at uneven rates characterizes this month's   economic reports. Although capacity utilization is high in several   major industries, shortages of raw materials, components, and   finished goods remain the exception. The pace of consumer spending   slackened somewhat in most areas in late April and May. However,   opinion varies widely concerning the implications of this tendency.   A positive outlook persists but is heavily tempered by caution in   inventory building and capacity expansion. Price behavior appears   fairly normal for a cyclical expansion; increases are primarily in   sectors where spot shortages or a need to adjust to rising costs   exist. Demand for business loans is flat or increasing slightly.   Adverse weather conditions have affected yields of several major   crops. Continuing expansion at uneven rates characterizes this month's   economic reports. Although capacity utilization is high in several   major industries, shortages of raw materials, components, and   finished goods remain the exception. The pace of consumer spending   slackened somewhat in most areas in late April and May. However,   opinion varies widely concerning the implications of this tendency.   A positive outlook persists but is heavily tempered by caution in   inventory building and capacity expansion. Price behavior appears   fairly normal for a cyclical expansion; increases are primarily in   sectors where spot shortages or a need to adjust to rising costs   exist. Demand for business loans is flat or increasing slightly.   Adverse weather conditions have affected yields of several major   crops. Major industries report generally high capacity utilization rates.   Yet, capacity is regarded as adequate for the next 6 to 12 months in   almost all industries. Shortages are expected to be temporary in   most cases or confined to a relatively limited sector affected by   unique conditions. With some exceptions, and a caveat concerning   comparability of reports, high utilization rates are found in paper   (90 to 100 percent), wood products, steel (80 to 90 percent),   textiles (85 to 100 percent), apparel, chemicals (80 to 100   percent), oil refining (85 to 90 percent), and automobiles (80 to   100 percent). Low utilization rates are confined to furniture,   aluminum, machine tools, and agricultural chemicals. In each industry, however, a more meaningful impression is obtained   by differentiating between particular products. In the steel   industry, for example, flat-rolled steel used in consumer durable   goods is in fairly tight supply, as are foundry products such as   castings. Abundant capacity and supplies exist of other products   used for capital goods and heavy construction. Current shortages are few, across the board, and generally reflect   special conditions. Foundry products, for example, are frequently   mentioned as an area of potential shortages. Both Chicago and Kansas   City note that closing of foundries because of EPA regulations is   reducing capacity in this industry. Other facilities which are   similarly affected are coke ovens and forging operations. Several   responses indicate that coke supplies are a potential raw material   problem for steel producers. The primary current bottleneck in most Districts is the supply of   natural gas to users on interruptible contracts. Uncertainty   concerning natural gas supplies is widespread and has resulted in   substantial capital investment in stand-by energy systems. Concern   also exists about the reliability of natural gas liquids used as   feedstocks in chemical processes. Slackening consumer spending, beginning in about mid-April, is noted   in a number of reports. In most areas, durable goods sales,   especially automobiles, remain strong; nondurables, particularly   apparel and department store sales, have weakened. Explanations   include cool weather, smaller tax refunds, a shift from nondurable   to durable purchases, as well as a return to a sustainable growth   rate. Boston reports some retailers are cutting back on future   commitments, while Philadelphia expects such action to follow,   should the present tendency be confirmed. Dallas reports that the   fall apparel market, held in May, was weak for women's and some   men's clothing lines. Richmond and Philadelphia note continued   optimism among most retailers; Cleveland finds that some remain   positive, but one director fears a spending decline serious enough   to ""trigger a double-bottom recession."" Each of these three   Districts notes an excessive level of retail inventories. The inventory condition of manufacturers varies greatly. Dallas   finds factory inventories manageable, and Kansas City notes attempts   by many firms to retain a lean inventory position. Philadelphia   finds a decline in inventories of manufacturers for the first time   since January, but Chicago reports cautious inventory building. One-third of the manufacturers in the Richmond District report an   excessive inventory level, with most others indicating satisfaction   with their condition. Capital spending remains static. Boston finds a disappointing demand   for machine tools. Chicago notes an improvement in capital goods   orders but expects no uptrend until late in 1976. Cleveland expects   little gain in the strength of fixed investment during the second   half. An exception exists in the case of capital investment in   agriculture, where strength is noted by Minneapolis and Chicago. New   York, Chicago, Kansas City, and Cleveland find environmental   regulations to be a source of uncertainty and a major disincentive   to capacity expansion. Price behavior is consistent with a normal cyclical pattern. Spot   shortages have caused sporadic price increases, as in newsprint; but   in cases such as heavy crude oil, chemical fertilizer, and carpet   yarn, oversupplies are causing price shading. Prices are generally   expected to behave normally within the context of a cyclical   recovery. Loan demand continues to increase slowly. Business loans have inched   up,"" according to St. Louis, Richmond, and Kansas City but have not   increased in Philadelphia. Gains in consumer loans are widespread.   St. Louis reports moderating savings inflows. Kansas City finds some   banks beginning to rebuild certificates of deposit. Minneapolis reports that the recent drought will almost certainly   curtail crop yields in Minnesota and has now spread westward into   the Dakotas. The main impact is expected on prices of barley, oats,   flax, and durum wheat. San Francisco reports weak demand, low   prices, and surpluses of beans, potatoes, and wheat. However, a   possible beef shortage is foreseen for late 1976. Richmond notes a   sharp decline in the winter wheat crop and freeze damage to the   peach crop."
1976-07-14,national,overall,"
The prospect is for a sustained economic expansion in the last half of the year. Although the majority of the Districts report that activity moderated in the second quarter, the outlook for the rest of the year is optimistic. Retail sales, although somewhat weaker this quarter, are expected to pick up. Manufacturing output shows little sign of weakness and it is not being hampered at this time by capacity limitations. Generally inventories are being kept under control and no build-up is anticipated. Residential construction continues to recover in most Districts but multiple-housing and commercial construction remains weak. Despite some problems with weather conditions, agricultural prospects are good. Demand for business loans continues sluggish in most Districts.
The growth of retail sales slowed somewhat in the second quarter in most regions. This slowing is expected to be temporary and retailers are optimistic about prospects for the rest of the year. Soft goods sales are generally good but major appliances exhibit more variation in demand. Some Districts (Chicago, Minneapolis) report weakness in appliance sales but others (Philadelphia) are experiencing good demand. Appliance manufacturers in the St. Louis District are experiencing a slowing of orders. Expenditures on tourism are high in most vacation areas (Atlanta, Philadelphia, Minneapolis).
Consumer spending for automobiles is high, and larger and intermediate sized models are in great demand. Some weakness is evident in small car sales. Chicago reports that the smallest auto producer which concentrates on small models has stopped assembly of 1976 models earlier than usual, while the larger manufacturers are pushing production of their large cars. At present, the strike of tire manufacturers is not causing problems for car manufacturers.
Manufacturing activity generally continues to expand. Demand for steel has increased (Chicago, Cleveland) and order books are full for flat rolled steel. Farm equipment sales show a mixed pattern. In Chicago, sales have exceeded expectations, but in Atlanta they are described as poor. Aircraft production prospects have improved primarily because of increased government contracts (St. Louis, San Francisco). The pattern is mixed for machine tools; Cleveland reports increased orders but Boston and Atlanta manufacturers' sales remain low.
For most industries, operating rates are below capacity. Capacity is being increased by many producers. Philadelphia notes that one-third of its survey respondents plan to increase their plant and equipment expenditures. Producers of aluminum, glass containers, and certain plastics are approaching full capacity. Shortages are not widespread although manufacturers may face problems in obtaining sufficient natural gas supplies (Chicago, San Francisco). Gasoline is not expected to be in short supply this summer, but New York reports a forecast of tighter supplies later in the year.
No major build-up in inventories is in prospect. Most retailers and manufacturers regard their inventories as adequate, however in the Richmond District, 70 percent of retailers surveyed thought their inventories were excessive. Retailers are following a cautious policy in rebuilding stocks despite an optimistic sales outlook (Boston, New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San Francisco).
Residential construction is recovering at a moderate rate in most Districts and it is described as good in the Kansas City District. Some concern is expressed about the effect of higher prices dampening the growth of sales (St. Louis, Minneapolis). Multiple-housing and heavy construction remains weak; Dallas reports the greatest weakness is in highway construction.
The agriculture outlook for most crops appears to be improving. Drought conditions have ended in several Districts (Minneapolis, St. Louis) and yields are expected to be good while prices will be firm. St. Louis and Atlanta note that cotton acreage is being reduced because of wet weather. Cattle prices may recover later this year, but they have been falling recently. Low prices have resulted in less cattle being placed on feed (Dallas). Kansas City reports excellent prospects for the wheat crop in its District, although nationally the crop should be lower than in 1975. Crops such as soybeans and corn are likely to be larger than last year according to Chicago, St. Louis and Atlanta.
Commercial banks are experiencing sluggish business loan demand and little strengthening is expected. The major exception is Kansas City where strong increases are reported. Consumer lending in the Boston District is relatively strong. Boston and New York banks are experiencing strong competition from savings institutions whose     deposit-accepting and lending powers have been increased. Cleveland and Kansas City savings and loan associations report strong mortgage loan demand.
 
The prospect is for a sustained economic expansion in the last half of the year. Although the majority of the Districts report that activity moderated in the second quarter, the outlook for the rest of the year is optimistic. Retail sales, although somewhat weaker this quarter, are expected to pick up. Manufacturing output shows little sign of weakness and it is not being hampered at this time by capacity limitations. Generally inventories are being kept under control and no build-up is anticipated. Residential construction continues to recover in most Districts but multiple-housing and commercial construction remains weak. Despite some problems with weather conditions, agricultural prospects are good. Demand for business loans continues sluggish in most Districts.
The growth of retail sales slowed somewhat in the second quarter in most regions. This slowing is expected to be temporary and retailers are optimistic about prospects for the rest of the year. Soft goods sales are generally good but major appliances exhibit more variation in demand. Some Districts (Chicago, Minneapolis) report weakness in appliance sales but others (Philadelphia) are experiencing good demand. Appliance manufacturers in the St. Louis District are experiencing a slowing of orders. Expenditures on tourism are high in most vacation areas (Atlanta, Philadelphia, Minneapolis).
Consumer spending for automobiles is high, and larger and intermediate sized models are in great demand. Some weakness is evident in small car sales. Chicago reports that the smallest auto producer which concentrates on small models has stopped assembly of 1976 models earlier than usual, while the larger manufacturers are pushing production of their large cars. At present, the strike of tire manufacturers is not causing problems for car manufacturers.
Manufacturing activity generally continues to expand. Demand for steel has increased (Chicago, Cleveland) and order books are full for flat rolled steel. Farm equipment sales show a mixed pattern. In Chicago, sales have exceeded expectations, but in Atlanta they are described as poor. Aircraft production prospects have improved primarily because of increased government contracts (St. Louis, San Francisco). The pattern is mixed for machine tools; Cleveland reports increased orders but Boston and Atlanta manufacturers' sales remain low.
For most industries, operating rates are below capacity. Capacity is being increased by many producers. Philadelphia notes that one-third of its survey respondents plan to increase their plant and equipment expenditures. Producers of aluminum, glass containers, and certain plastics are approaching full capacity. Shortages are not widespread although manufacturers may face problems in obtaining sufficient natural gas supplies (Chicago, San Francisco). Gasoline is not expected to be in short supply this summer, but New York reports a forecast of tighter supplies later in the year.
No major build-up in inventories is in prospect. Most retailers and manufacturers regard their inventories as adequate, however in the Richmond District, 70 percent of retailers surveyed thought their inventories were excessive. Retailers are following a cautious policy in rebuilding stocks despite an optimistic sales outlook (Boston, New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San Francisco).
Residential construction is recovering at a moderate rate in most Districts and it is described as good in the Kansas City District. Some concern is expressed about the effect of higher prices dampening the growth of sales (St. Louis, Minneapolis). Multiple-housing and heavy construction remains weak; Dallas reports the greatest weakness is in highway construction.
The agriculture outlook for most crops appears to be improving. Drought conditions have ended in several Districts (Minneapolis, St. Louis) and yields are expected to be good while prices will be firm. St. Louis and Atlanta note that cotton acreage is being reduced because of wet weather. Cattle prices may recover later this year, but they have been falling recently. Low prices have resulted in less cattle being placed on feed (Dallas). Kansas City reports excellent prospects for the wheat crop in its District, although nationally the crop should be lower than in 1975. Crops such as soybeans and corn are likely to be larger than last year according to Chicago, St. Louis and Atlanta.
Commercial banks are experiencing sluggish business loan demand and little strengthening is expected. The major exception is Kansas City where strong increases are reported. Consumer lending in the Boston District is relatively strong. Boston and New York banks are experiencing strong competition from savings institutions whose     deposit-accepting and lending powers have been increased. Cleveland and Kansas City savings and loan associations report strong mortgage loan demand.
 The prospect is for a sustained economic expansion in the last half of the year. Although the majority of the Districts report that activity moderated in the second quarter, the outlook for the rest of the year is optimistic. Retail sales, although somewhat weaker this quarter, are expected to pick up. Manufacturing output shows little sign of weakness and it is not being hampered at this time by capacity limitations. Generally inventories are being kept under control and no build-up is anticipated. Residential construction continues to recover in most Districts but multiple-housing and commercial construction remains weak. Despite some problems with weather conditions, agricultural prospects are good. Demand for business loans continues sluggish in most Districts. The growth of retail sales slowed somewhat in the second quarter in most regions. This slowing is expected to be temporary and retailers are optimistic about prospects for the rest of the year. Soft goods sales are generally good but major appliances exhibit more variation in demand. Some Districts (Chicago, Minneapolis) report weakness in appliance sales but others (Philadelphia) are experiencing good demand. Appliance manufacturers in the St. Louis District are experiencing a slowing of orders. Expenditures on tourism are high in most vacation areas (Atlanta, Philadelphia, Minneapolis). Consumer spending for automobiles is high, and larger and intermediate sized models are in great demand. Some weakness is evident in small car sales. Chicago reports that the smallest auto producer which concentrates on small models has stopped assembly of 1976 models earlier than usual, while the larger manufacturers are pushing production of their large cars. At present, the strike of tire manufacturers is not causing problems for car manufacturers. Manufacturing activity generally continues to expand. Demand for steel has increased (Chicago, Cleveland) and order books are full for flat rolled steel. Farm equipment sales show a mixed pattern. In Chicago, sales have exceeded expectations, but in Atlanta they are described as poor. Aircraft production prospects have improved primarily because of increased government contracts (St. Louis, San Francisco). The pattern is mixed for machine tools; Cleveland reports increased orders but Boston and Atlanta manufacturers' sales remain low. For most industries, operating rates are below capacity. Capacity is being increased by many producers. Philadelphia notes that one-third of its survey respondents plan to increase their plant and equipment expenditures. Producers of aluminum, glass containers, and certain plastics are approaching full capacity. Shortages are not widespread although manufacturers may face problems in obtaining sufficient natural gas supplies (Chicago, San Francisco). Gasoline is not expected to be in short supply this summer, but New York reports a forecast of tighter supplies later in the year. No major build-up in inventories is in prospect. Most retailers and manufacturers regard their inventories as adequate, however in the Richmond District, 70 percent of retailers surveyed thought their inventories were excessive. Retailers are following a cautious policy in rebuilding stocks despite an optimistic sales outlook (Boston, New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis, San Francisco). Residential construction is recovering at a moderate rate in most Districts and it is described as good in the Kansas City District. Some concern is expressed about the effect of higher prices dampening the growth of sales (St. Louis, Minneapolis). Multiple-housing and heavy construction remains weak; Dallas reports the greatest weakness is in highway construction. The agriculture outlook for most crops appears to be improving. Drought conditions have ended in several Districts (Minneapolis, St. Louis) and yields are expected to be good while prices will be firm. St. Louis and Atlanta note that cotton acreage is being reduced because of wet weather. Cattle prices may recover later this year, but they have been falling recently. Low prices have resulted in less cattle being placed on feed (Dallas). Kansas City reports excellent prospects for the wheat crop in its District, although nationally the crop should be lower than in 1975. Crops such as soybeans and corn are likely to be larger than last year according to Chicago, St. Louis and Atlanta. Commercial banks are experiencing sluggish business loan demand and little strengthening is expected. The major exception is Kansas City where strong increases are reported. Consumer lending in the Boston District is relatively strong. Boston and New York banks are experiencing strong competition from savings institutions whose     deposit-accepting and lending powers have been increased. Cleveland and Kansas City savings and loan associations report strong mortgage loan demand."
1976-08-11,national,overall,"This month's District reports suggest that the economic advance has   continued at about the moderate  second-quarter rate. Automobile   sales remain strong, but department store sales softened in July.   Retailers are still generally optimistic about the sales outlook,   however. Manufacturing activity appears to be expanding, albeit at a   modest pace, and there are indications that firms are beginning to   revise capital spending plans upward. Capacity appears ample for the   time being. While construction of single-family residences   continues to increase, building of multiple-family dwellings remains   very sluggish. The agricultural situation is generally favorable,   although inadequate moisture may reduce crop production in some   areas. Commercial bank lending to business continues to show little   if any strength; loans to consumers are still on an uptrend. This month's District reports suggest that the economic advance has   continued at about the moderate  second-quarter rate. Automobile   sales remain strong, but department store sales softened in July.   Retailers are still generally optimistic about the sales outlook,   however. Manufacturing activity appears to be expanding, albeit at a   modest pace, and there are indications that firms are beginning to   revise capital spending plans upward. Capacity appears ample for the   time being. While construction of single-family residences   continues to increase, building of multiple-family dwellings remains   very sluggish. The agricultural situation is generally favorable,   although inadequate moisture may reduce crop production in some   areas. Commercial bank lending to business continues to show little   if any strength; loans to consumers are still on an uptrend. Readings on consumer spending are mixed. Automobile sales remain   strong, with demand favoring large- and   intermediate-size American   cars, some of which are in short supply. Department store sales, on   the other hand, softened in July and generally have been below   expected levels, although Atlanta reports healthy gains stemming   from expanding convention and tourist trade. While retailers for the   most part remain optimistic, there are indications that some have   scaled back sales forecasts for the second half of this year   (Boston, Minneapolis, Kansas City). There are also scattered reports   of heavier than desired inventories at the retail level, but serious   imbalances thus far have been avoided, in part because of cautious   inventory policies. Manufacturing activity appears to be expanding at a moderate rate.   Increases in new orders and shipments are reported by Philadelphia,   and Chicago indicates that order backlogs for steel remain   substantial. Richmond and St. Louis, however, report a leveling-off   in manufacturing activity. Cleveland indicates an easing of tight   supplies of certain steel and chemical products as a result of a   slowing in orders. While the rubber and coal strikes have not had   much impact as yet, the coal strike could affect steel output   because coke is already in short supply. Further increases in   industrial materials prices are in the offing, although these may be   of relatively modest proportions (New York, San Francisco). Capacity remains adequate in most sectors, and outright shortages so   far have not materialized. Steel lead times have shortened recently,   and steel capacity is judged sufficient for the remainder of this   year and most of 1977. Similarly, chemicals and most capital goods   industries have ample capacity. There is concern about the future   availability of a variety of metal products and of natural gas,   although in this regard Chicago and Dallas indicate that a pickup in   drilling of gas wells is expected once the new ceiling prices on   interstate natural gas shipments become effective. Manufacturers   continue to manage inventories cautiously, and changes in stocks are   generally small. There are scattered reports of inventories above   desired levels, but others indicate that producers' inventories are   lean. The recovery in capital spending remains modest. There are signs,   however, that firms are beginning to reuse capital spending programs   upward. Chicago reports that plans previously shelved by automobile   and steel companies are being revived; orders for transportation   equipment have also improved. Atlanta indicates that capital   spending plans have been raised by chemicals and by textiles and   related industries. Moreover, export demand for capital equipment is   reported strong, with significant orders from the USSR and from   OPEC. Some Districts report continued growth in home building, with   activity concentrated in construction of single-family units.   Apartment construction remains sluggish. Demand for mobile homes is   very strong (Dallas). Comments on nonresidential construction   suggest that it is still weak (Minneapolis, New York), although the   possibility of some pickup in activity is foreseen. Mortgage funds   are generally available, although St. Louis notes some recent upward   pressure on mortgage rates and the full effects of the sale of the 8   percent Treasury note on savings flows are not yet apparent. Business loans continue to show little if any growth, and bank   lending rates have tended to decline. Kansas City reports, however,   that most of the District commercial banks contacted were slow to   move to the 7 percent prime rate, with some respondents still   posting a rate of 7 1/2 percent. Consumer loans are generally rising   moderately. Loans to agribusinesses and farmers are increasing. The agricultural outlook is favorable for the most part. St. Louis   reports that recent rains have improved yield prospects for some   crops, and Atlanta notes that a new irrigation system is enhancing   yields in part of Georgia. Kansas City suggests that increases in   cattle prices will be only modest over the remainder of this year.   Inadequate moisture has caused concern in some areas (Richmond,   Chicago), while cotton acreage has been adversely affected because   of excessively wet weather."
1976-09-15,national,overall,"Continued moderation in the pace of economic activity highlights   reports from most Districts. Several Districts report spurts in   retail sales in August, but few report signs of strengthening in   manufacturing and housing. The recovery in capital goods continues   at a gradual and uneven pace, and the outlook does not suggest   substantial acceleration in the short-term. Concern over possible   shortages and bottlenecks appears to have diminished with the slower   rate of recovery. Business loan demand remains weak, and there is   little indication of much revival for the next several months.   Drought, especially in the corn belt, has reduced harvest prospects   for corn, soybeans and cotton, suggesting possible upward price   pressures for those crops and for cattle. Continued moderation in the pace of economic activity highlights   reports from most Districts. Several Districts report spurts in   retail sales in August, but few report signs of strengthening in   manufacturing and housing. The recovery in capital goods continues   at a gradual and uneven pace, and the outlook does not suggest   substantial acceleration in the short-term. Concern over possible   shortages and bottlenecks appears to have diminished with the slower   rate of recovery. Business loan demand remains weak, and there is   little indication of much revival for the next several months.   Drought, especially in the corn belt, has reduced harvest prospects   for corn, soybeans and cotton, suggesting possible upward price   pressures for those crops and for cattle. Most Districts report a spurt in consumer sales in August. The   pickup reported in most areas was mixed, but New York was especially   encouraged by ""substantial momentum in recent weeks"" across all   product lines. New car sales were strong across the nation, but   other big-ticket items and the tourist trade moved well only in some   Districts. The outlook for consumer spending for the rest of the   year ranged from continued steady improvement in Philadelphia,   Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco to little change in Richmond. Manufacturing activity continues to improve gradually and unevenly.   Further strengthening is noted in Philadelphia, Atlanta, St. Louis,   and Minneapolis; but Cleveland reports declines in steel, Atlanta   and St. Louis declines in paper, and Dallas reports slower growth in   chemicals. Philadelphia's most recent survey of manufacturers showed   that two-thirds of the respondents expect continued gains in   manufacturing over the next 6 months, and Minneapolis reports its   latest survey showed manufacturers expect substantial gains in sales   for the next three quarters.   Reports on residential construction suggest fairly strong demand for   single-family housing. St. Louis notes that low vacancy rates for   apartments in St. Louis and Little Rock spurred plans for new   apartment projects. A special sales incentive program doubled   condominium sales in Memphis. San Francisco reports a rise in home   building in Southern California and Utah has stimulated lumber sales   production. Despite the moderated pace of recovery, businessmen are still   optimistic over prospects. Cleveland, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and   Kansas City all indicate little fear exists that the recovery will   prematurely peak. Nevertheless, inventory and capital spending plans   of business appear to be cautious. Richmond reports that some   manufacturers still view their inventories as higher than desired.   Philadelphia's survey shows manufacturers plan little addition to   inventories for the next 6 months. There is still some liquidation   of stocks, including copper, linerboard and corrugated paper,   electrical machinery, and sheet steel. There is still little indication of a surge in capital spending.   Ample capacity and projections of only moderate growth in demand   over the next year or so are among factors that are dampening   spending. For capital goods producers, recovery is spotty. Perhaps   most encouraging reports are those from Chicago and Cleveland, where   sizable increases in machine tool business occurred in the last few   months. Recent increases were also noted for heavy-duty trucks and   drilling rigs. However, both Chicago and Cleveland comment that   demand for machinery, such as cranes, construction machinery, and   mine shovels, is still weak. Concern over shortages appears to have diminished. Tightness in   steel products virtually disappeared with the sharp drop in demand   for flat-rolled products, which some producers were informally   allocating a few months ago. Spot shortages may appear for a limited   number of products, such as special castings, snow tires, and some   chemical products, but District reports suggest no widespread   bottlenecks or shortages are now apparent or in prospect. Business loan demand remains weak and the outlook suggests little to   moderate recovery over the next several months. Boston and San   Francisco cite the lack of inventory building, the inability to   recover return on investment, and the availability of funds from   other sources among reasons for the continued sluggishness. Drought in several parts of the country has reduced yield estimates   for corn, soybeans, and cotton, according to reports from St. Louis,   Kansas City, and Minneapolis. However, Kansas City reports the corn   harvest is still expected to slightly exceed the record 1975   harvest. Sharp declines in supplies of soybeans from 1975 will   likely cause upward price pressures, but the outlook for corn prices   remains uncertain. Minneapolis, San Francisco, and Richmond report   wheat, fruit crops, and flue-cured tobacco harvests are expected to   range from good to excellent."
1976-10-13,national,overall,"District reports generally suggest some recent moderation in the   pace of overall economic expansion as well as in the rate of   inflation. For the most part the manufacturing sector continues to   expand but at what is characterized as a sluggish, modest, or less   vigorous rate. Retail sales have been erratic in recent months but   are apparently increasing at a moderate rate over time. New   automobiles are selling well in the Atlanta, Chicago, and   Minneapolis Districts. Current outlays for capital goods have yet to   improve significantly. New York and Cleveland, however, report a   pickup in capital goods orders. Construction of single-family   housing is showing strength in the Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas   Districts and remains firm in St. Louis' District despite some   recent leveling off. Other construction remains basically weak   except in the Atlanta District. The agricultural sector remains   depressed, suffering from the recent drought, soft commodity prices   and erratic weather conditions. Most districts appear to be   experiencing some abatement of upward price pressures but price   expectations have not been affected uniformly. Soft demand, slower   growth, and excess capacity are causing downward revisions of some   inflation forecasts. On the other hand, New York, Cleveland, and   Kansas City cite continued concern over inflation among some   businessmen, due to continuing cost pressures, notably wage   settlements in excess of productivity gains, rising energy prices,   and the higher costs of new plants. District reports generally suggest some recent moderation in the   pace of overall economic expansion as well as in the rate of   inflation. For the most part the manufacturing sector continues to   expand but at what is characterized as a sluggish, modest, or less   vigorous rate. Retail sales have been erratic in recent months but   are apparently increasing at a moderate rate over time. New   automobiles are selling well in the Atlanta, Chicago, and   Minneapolis Districts. Current outlays for capital goods have yet to   improve significantly. New York and Cleveland, however, report a   pickup in capital goods orders. Construction of single-family   housing is showing strength in the Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas   Districts and remains firm in St. Louis' District despite some   recent leveling off. Other construction remains basically weak   except in the Atlanta District. The agricultural sector remains   depressed, suffering from the recent drought, soft commodity prices   and erratic weather conditions. Most districts appear to be   experiencing some abatement of upward price pressures but price   expectations have not been affected uniformly. Soft demand, slower   growth, and excess capacity are causing downward revisions of some   inflation forecasts. On the other hand, New York, Cleveland, and   Kansas City cite continued concern over inflation among some   businessmen, due to continuing cost pressures, notably wage   settlements in excess of productivity gains, rising energy prices,   and the higher costs of new plants. Chicago, Richmond, Cleveland, and Atlanta report some recent pickup   in orders for machinery and electrical equipment. Primary metals   producers continue to experience sluggish demand although New York   Directors expect demand to strengthen in the near term.   Manufacturing in the Philadelphia District is generally expanding   while San Francisco notes unexpectedly strong orders for commercial   aircraft, which has contributed to a leveling off in the aerospace   industry. Retailers have been experiencing wide month-to-month variations in   sales, and September seems to have been a generally weak month   except in the Boston District and in the New York area where new-found strength in consumer spending extended into early October.   Expectations regarding fourth quarter sales vary across districts   but what is widely perceived as erratic consumer behavior is   apparently creating a mood of caution and uncertainty among   retailers. On a more positive note, Chicago reports that sales of   television sets are up significantly although still below   expectations. Sales of new automobiles seem to be proceeding well,   with the strike having only minor and scattered effects. Minneapolis   and St. Louis report some spot shortages, such as of full- and   intermediate-sized cars. Tourism appears relatively strong although   some areas have yet to experience the expected level of activity.   Chicago reports consumers spending freely for travel and   entertainment. Some strength appears to have developed in residential construction,   particularly in the Minneapolis, Chicago, Atlanta, St. Louis, and   Dallas Districts. But with the exception of Atlanta and Chicago the   pickup seems to be concentrated in single-family dwellings.   Minneapolis reports that housing unit authorizations have reached   1972 levels. Commercial and industrial construction remains   basically soft although Atlanta and Chicago suggest some revival of   interest in this area. The overall level of business loan demand remains weak nationwide.   Kansas City, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Dallas report little sign   of renewed strength in business loan demand. Richmond, on the other   hand, reports a healthy increase in loans during September. Only in   agricultural lending does there seem to be consistent strength.   Dallas, Minneapolis, and Kansas City point to particular strength in   this sector, which they attribute partly to producers holding   commodities off of the markets. News from the agricultural sector is generally gloomy, at least from   the standpoint of farmers. Widespread drought and erratic rainfall   have been disruptive, causing reduced yields on many crops, while   what are perceived as low prices are discouraging farmers from   marketing some crops and livestock. Kansas City in particular notes   that the weakness in prices of Tenth District agricultural products   is putting producers in a precarious financial position.   Specifically, low prices for wheat, rice, and cattle are reported to   be depressing factors. Minneapolis expects the reduced crop yields   due to the drought and the depressed livestock industry to adversely   affect income. Richmond District farmers, on the other hand, have   experienced an increase, although slight, in cash farm income.   There seems to be no general concern over supply or capacity   constraints. Boston foresees no problems other than perhaps in the   lumber industry. Chicago mentions some lengthening of lead times for   electrical components, and in the St. Louis District a manufacturer   of diesel engines is reportedly operating at capacity and extending   order backlogs into next year. The most commonly held view of future price developments is that the   inflation rate will decline further due to a moderation in demand.   Atlanta, New York, St. Louis, Minneapolis, and Richmond all suggest   expectations of some further decline in the rate of price increases.   New York, Cleveland, and Kansas City, however, indicate continued   concern over inflation. Continuing cost pressures deriving from   imminent wage negotiations, rising energy costs, and higher costs of   plant expansion are cited by these districts."
1976-11-10,national,overall,"Continuing attenuation of the economic recovery is evidenced in the   past month's reports. Despite some recent increases in soft goods   sales, merchants generally expect holiday gains no greater than a   normal seasonal advance. There is some feeling that the recent boost   may be the result of abnormally cold weather in combination with   price reductions rather than an upsurge of demand. Sales of   appliances and furniture differ in strength between regions, but   auto sales are generally good. Production declines have occurred in   several key industries, as efforts to realign inventories have   reduced demand. Some strengthening is discernible in capital   expenditures. Single-family housing continues to dominate   construction activity. Price reductions are occurring in those   industries seeking to reduce inventories, but other firms are   hedging against wage and price controls by raising prices. Credit   demand is generally flat, with certain exceptions reflecting special   conditions. The agricultural sector presents a picture of marked   contrasts in prosperity. Continuing attenuation of the economic recovery is evidenced in the   past month's reports. Despite some recent increases in soft goods   sales, merchants generally expect holiday gains no greater than a   normal seasonal advance. There is some feeling that the recent boost   may be the result of abnormally cold weather in combination with   price reductions rather than an upsurge of demand. Sales of   appliances and furniture differ in strength between regions, but   auto sales are generally good. Production declines have occurred in   several key industries, as efforts to realign inventories have   reduced demand. Some strengthening is discernible in capital   expenditures. Single-family housing continues to dominate   construction activity. Price reductions are occurring in those   industries seeking to reduce inventories, but other firms are   hedging against wage and price controls by raising prices. Credit   demand is generally flat, with certain exceptions reflecting special   conditions. The agricultural sector presents a picture of marked   contrasts in prosperity. The degree of optimism concerning consumer spending has diminished   somewhat. Most areas expect a normal seasonal gain during the   holiday season. Soft goods sales, which have been weak, were helped   by the arrival of colder weather and recent price markdowns.   Philadelphia notes that outerwear sales have risen in advance of   their normal seasonal upswing due to the cold weather. Dallas notes   some price resistance in men's clothing lines. Major appliance and   furniture sales are weak in the Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis   Districts but have strengthened in the Richmond, Atlanta, and Kansas   City regions. Merchants remain hopeful but uncertain about further   strengthening. Auto sales appear to be fairly strong, except for   smaller models; San Francisco and Cleveland note some signs of   weakness. Chicago views strongly increased consumer borrowing as a   confirmation of growing consumer confidence; similar trends are   noted by New York, Philadelphia, and Richmond. Dallas reports   lackluster consumer loan demand and, like San Francisco, interprets   high savings inflows as an indicator of consumer caution. Production declines have taken place in several industries. Steel   output has been reduced to limit an inventory build-up; but   increasing orders for some types of steel are found by Chicago and   Richmond. Appliance production has been sharply reduced in the   Chicago, St. Louis, and Cleveland Districts. Declines are also noted   in output of paper and board, plastics, and aluminum. Orders are   down for lumber, apparel, chemicals, and furniture. Copper, lead,   and zinc output has risen in the western states. Lift truck   inventories have stabilized, and orders recently have been   increasing. Increasing strength is detectable in capital expenditures. Boston,   Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis note increased orders for machine   tools. New York cites an increase in new orders for capital goods at   a number of firms, but Philadelphia finds a decrease in the   proportion of firms planning further increases in capital outlays.   New York mentions environmental and other government regulations, as   well as the threat of wage and price controls as deterrents to   capacity expansion. Atlanta and San Francisco report that capital   expenditures by paper companies will be very limited in the   foreseeable future. Construction activity continues to be strongest in the single-family   home category. Housing starts are at a high level in Texas, and   construction employment has expanded rapidly during the past year.   Home building in the St. Louis area is strong, but a decline has   occurred in Memphis, other parts of Tennessee, and Mississippi. In   the Los Angeles area, home construction is very strong, but average   monthly price increases of nearly 3 percent are now generating buyer   resistance. Price reductions are occurring in sectors where inventory   accumulations are excessive. In both steel and apparel, price   concessions are being made to stimulate demand. Lumber prices have   softened in the past two months. St. Louis states that chemical   prices should remain stable as a result of new capacity coming on-stream. Atlanta finds evidence that businesses are raising list   prices as a hedge against possible imposition of wage and price   controls. Shortages and bottlenecks are of little concern, partly as   a result of the economic slowdown. Some concern continues to be   expressed about natural gas shortages. Demand for credit remains generally weak, with interesting regional   exceptions. Consumer loans provide an element of strength in several   areas. In the Southwest, lending for petroleum drilling is the sole   area of growth in loans. Dallas, Kansas City, and Minneapolis report   that the demand for agricultural loans is rapidly increasing. Higher   costs and lower prices are forcing farmers and ranchers to seek   extensions of present loans. In wheat growing areas, many farmers   are withholding grain from the market to await higher prices. Dallas   notes that marginal farmers will find it difficult to obtain   operating capital unless Farmers' Home Administration or Small   Business Administration loan guarantees are granted. In contrast to   the general flatness reported in commercial and industrial loans,   San Francisco finds a modest increase in loan demand from small- and   medium-sized companies, and Richmond notes an increasing demand in   wholesale and retail trade. The agricultural sector presents a mixed impression. Farm cash   receipts in the Richmond region have benefited from sharp price   increases for flue-cured tobacco. Minneapolis reports that price   declines for corn, wheat, hogs, and cattle, as well as the effects   of drought on crop production, present a bleak prospect of lower   income, reduced spending, and increased borrowing. St. Louis and   Kansas City note that cattle ranchers and feeders remain in a loss   position, despite recent price increases. Land in the Southeast is   likely to be shifted from cattle production into other crops, with   the potential for an eventual beef shortage. San Francisco reports a   bountiful harvest; supplies of fruit, wheat, beans, and potatoes are   large, storage facilities are bulging, and prices have declined."
1976-12-15,national,overall,"Although many Districts report that activity over the past month has   been sluggish or flat, almost as many report that the lull in   activity is over and an uptrend has been resumed. Consumer spending   is anticipated to be 8 to 10 percent higher this Christmas season   than last although sales will not be this exuberant in agricultural   areas where income gains are low this year. Residential housing has   been picking up momentum over the past three months, generating   capacity operations at lumber mills. There is some doubt as to   whether the recent rash of posted price increases will stick.   Business loan demand remains in the doldrums but inquiries at banks   have picked up. Savings flows at thrift institutions continue to set   new records. Although many Districts report that activity over the past month has   been sluggish or flat, almost as many report that the lull in   activity is over and an uptrend has been resumed. Consumer spending   is anticipated to be 8 to 10 percent higher this Christmas season   than last although sales will not be this exuberant in agricultural   areas where income gains are low this year. Residential housing has   been picking up momentum over the past three months, generating   capacity operations at lumber mills. There is some doubt as to   whether the recent rash of posted price increases will stick.   Business loan demand remains in the doldrums but inquiries at banks   have picked up. Savings flows at thrift institutions continue to set   new records. Consumer spending is not expected to be exuberant over the Christmas   season, nor is it expected to flag greatly. Gains over the last year   on the order of 8 to 10 percent are anticipated depending on the   amount of promotional effort expended. A larger proportion of sales   this year involve the use of credit. As reported by Minneapolis,   Richmond and Kansas City, spending is less buoyant in agricultural   areas where income is running about 5 percent over last year.   Inventories of big-ticket appliances continue to be high in the   Northeast. Sales of large cars and intermediates are very strong but   many reports state that the rebate program was unsuccessful in   moving subcompacts. The Dallas District is experiencing more robust   Christmas sales than elsewhere. The coldest winter in 80 years is draining fuel supplies in the   Midwest and, in some cases, raising home heating bills by 35 to 40   percent over last year. Observers in the oil industry in Dallas   expect an OPEC price increase of 10 percent which would lead to a   one cent per gallon increase in gasoline prices. Although the most recent indicators of industrial new orders,   employment and the workweek are down, this trend is generally   regarded as a lull and is not expected to continue. There is some   feeling that capital spending plans are being held up in   anticipation of an investment tax credit and other possible changes   from the new administration. The strength of residential   construction reported by Dallas and San Francisco is already causing   tight supply situations for lumber and gypsum in those areas.   According to Cleveland, steel economists have reduced their   forecasts of domestic steel shipments for 1977 from 105 million tons   to about 100 million tons, compared with an estimated 89 million   tons in 1976. Moreover, both the textile and apparel industries are   reported by Richmond to be experiencing declining activity and   capacity is regarded as excessive. The factors responsible are   excessive inventories and higher imports of apparel. It is unclear whether recent posted price increases for a wide range   of basic materials such as flat-rolled steel, aluminum sheeting,   chlorine and chlorine solvents and synthetic textiles will hold in   today's markets. Some of these increases were unexpected and are   being attributed to fear of the imposition of price controls.   Although the consensus appears to be that these increases will   stick, discounting seems to be a widespread practice. In agriculture, livestock feeding operations continue to be   unprofitable and some crops such as cotton had a below-normal yield   this year. The winter wheat crop has been planted, but farmers are   very concerned about the low level of soil moisture. Drought seems   to be a real fear this year across much of the nation's farmland.   Spending on new farm equipment and vehicles is down considerably and   loan activity, especially refinancing, is up. Business loan demand continues sluggish in all Districts. The Boston   District reports that four noted economists interviewed by them   believe that some stimulus is called for to avert an ""incipient   recession"" and ""...provide the strong financial climate for the   strong investment performance which had been hoped for but not yet   materialized."" However, some bankers in Philadelphia, Dallas, and   San Francisco have noted an increased number of encouraging   conversations with corporate borrowers regarding additions to plant   and equipment. The heavy inflow of funds into thrift associations has continued   and, as a result, both mortgage rates and interest rates for savers   are declining. Some savings and loan institutions in Cleveland are   raising the size of minimum savings certificates and withdrawing the   offer of certificates with less than 2-year maturities. In some   areas, mortgage rates have declined from nine percent to 8 1/2   percent over the past month."
1977-01-13,national,overall,"
This month's District reports strongly suggest that the ""pause"" in the current recovery has ended and that the pace of business activity is regaining momentum. Virtually all reports indicate some improvement in economic activity. Retailers generally enjoyed a good to excellent Christmas season, with sales strengthening markedly toward the close of the season and with continued strength evident in early January. Business inventories appear to be in line with desired levels, except for scattered exceptions. There is additional evidence of strengthening in residential construction. While the capital investment picture remains mixed, there appears to be mounting evidence of an impending improvement in that sector. Prices, however, continue under upward pressures. The demand for commercial loans remains generally sluggish, and inflows into savings deposits continue at a high rate.
As it has throughout the current recovery, consumer spending continues to provide the main thrust to the upswing. Retailers on the whole enjoyed a good Christmas season, with general merchandise sales rising above year-ago levels, in line with or exceeding expectations. The retail sales performance varied widely, however, ranging from unexpectedly strong and generally excellent (Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco) to above last year (Philadelphia, New York) and to a more restrained slightly improved (Richmond) and not overly strong (Kansas City). Auto sales, particularly those of standard or large size vehicles, are also mentioned as being particularly brisk by several Banks (including Minneapolis, Atlanta, Kansas City, and San Francisco). Although several Banks note that the improvement was achieved at least in part by dint of markdowns and other aggressive promotional activities, Chicago and New York report that by and large such activities did not reach exceptional proportions. A number of Banks report that the uptrend in sales that emerged as Christmas approached has continued in evidence in the immediate post-holiday period and early January. Atlanta and St. Louis thus report excellent results in post-Christmas promotions, and retail respondents in several Districts are reported to be cautiously optimistic regarding developments over the coming months. Respondents in the Minneapolis District feel that consumer confidence has improved since the election, but retailers in the Philadelphia District look for only moderate growth during 1977, with a sluggish first half.
Those comments that were received on residential housing suggest that consumer outlays for new homes continue to gather momentum. San Francisco reports that the residential housing market is very strong and continues to strengthen each month, and Minneapolis notes that District authorizations of new housing are close to 1972's record levels. St. Louis reports homebuilding made considerable progress in that District in 1976 and that prospects are for further gains this year, while Dallas respondents expect homebuilding will continue to be a major source of strength in the southwestern economy. Boston, however, characterizes residential construction as a major weak spot in the New England economy.
Inventories at the retail and/or manufacturing level were generally regarded to be about in line with sales and at desired levels, although there are scattered reports of undesirably high stocks of certain items, including some nonferrous metals, furniture, T.V.s, and smaller cars. Few indications of shortages were reported with the exception of an actual or potential dearth of natural gas mentioned by Richmond, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, as well as fuel oil in the Minneapolis District.
Turning to business expenditures for plant and equipment, the pace of such outlays by and large continues to lack vigor, but there is growing evidence that a pickup in this sector might be getting under way. Thus, among others, Cleveland reports rising activity in the machine tool, communications equipment, printing equipment and heavy duty truck industries. Chicago reports a pickup in orders for mining equipment, a further expansion of planned equipment purchases by auto companies, and alludes to the prospects that various major projects kept on the ""back burner"" by the food processing, paper, chemical, and glass industries might be activated this year. Although St. Louis characterizes prospects for capital spending as mixed, it reports several announcements of sizable investment plans for 1977, and Atlanta reports that new industrial expansion continues rapid in its District. About one third of the manufacturers surveyed monthly by Philadelphia plan increases in capital expenditures over the coming months. Respondents in the San Francisco District feel that tax incentives would have positive, albeit slight, effects in stimulating capital investments, if such incentives were made a permanent part of the tax structure. Respondents in Dallas and New York felt that major capital outlays would be deferred until the direction of government policy became clearer.
On the dark side, indications of increased upward pressure on prices were reported. Respondents in the Philadelphia monthly survey report that higher prices and costs are somewhat more widespread than in December, while in the latest Cleveland survey, the proportion of respondents expecting price increases remained as high as in the previous two months. Recent price increases in the steel industry are reported to be sticking, according to observers in the Chicago and New York Districts, although respondents indicate discounting of steel prices in the San Francisco District. Reports from agricultural areas of the nation note the relatively low prices currently paid producers for grains and certain other agricultural commodities as a result of record crops. Kansas City reports that earlier concerns over the District's winter wheat crop have been allayed by an extensive snowfall that has provided needed moisture as well as a protective snow cover. While grain prices may thus be held down, farmers are reported to expect rising cattle prices.
The demand for business loans at commercial banks generally continues sluggish, although loans to agriculture strengthened. Inflows into time and savings accounts continue at a high level, with consequent downward pressure on mortgage rates. Several District reports indicate reductions in rates paid on consumer time certificates, or consideration being given to such cuts, and Cleveland reports reductions in rates paid on passbook accounts at banks in several cities of the District.
 
This month's District reports strongly suggest that the ""pause"" in the current recovery has ended and that the pace of business activity is regaining momentum. Virtually all reports indicate some improvement in economic activity. Retailers generally enjoyed a good to excellent Christmas season, with sales strengthening markedly toward the close of the season and with continued strength evident in early January. Business inventories appear to be in line with desired levels, except for scattered exceptions. There is additional evidence of strengthening in residential construction. While the capital investment picture remains mixed, there appears to be mounting evidence of an impending improvement in that sector. Prices, however, continue under upward pressures. The demand for commercial loans remains generally sluggish, and inflows into savings deposits continue at a high rate.
As it has throughout the current recovery, consumer spending continues to provide the main thrust to the upswing. Retailers on the whole enjoyed a good Christmas season, with general merchandise sales rising above year-ago levels, in line with or exceeding expectations. The retail sales performance varied widely, however, ranging from unexpectedly strong and generally excellent (Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco) to above last year (Philadelphia, New York) and to a more restrained slightly improved (Richmond) and not overly strong (Kansas City). Auto sales, particularly those of standard or large size vehicles, are also mentioned as being particularly brisk by several Banks (including Minneapolis, Atlanta, Kansas City, and San Francisco). Although several Banks note that the improvement was achieved at least in part by dint of markdowns and other aggressive promotional activities, Chicago and New York report that by and large such activities did not reach exceptional proportions. A number of Banks report that the uptrend in sales that emerged as Christmas approached has continued in evidence in the immediate post-holiday period and early January. Atlanta and St. Louis thus report excellent results in post-Christmas promotions, and retail respondents in several Districts are reported to be cautiously optimistic regarding developments over the coming months. Respondents in the Minneapolis District feel that consumer confidence has improved since the election, but retailers in the Philadelphia District look for only moderate growth during 1977, with a sluggish first half.
Those comments that were received on residential housing suggest that consumer outlays for new homes continue to gather momentum. San Francisco reports that the residential housing market is very strong and continues to strengthen each month, and Minneapolis notes that District authorizations of new housing are close to 1972's record levels. St. Louis reports homebuilding made considerable progress in that District in 1976 and that prospects are for further gains this year, while Dallas respondents expect homebuilding will continue to be a major source of strength in the southwestern economy. Boston, however, characterizes residential construction as a major weak spot in the New England economy.
Inventories at the retail and/or manufacturing level were generally regarded to be about in line with sales and at desired levels, although there are scattered reports of undesirably high stocks of certain items, including some nonferrous metals, furniture, T.V.s, and smaller cars. Few indications of shortages were reported with the exception of an actual or potential dearth of natural gas mentioned by Richmond, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, as well as fuel oil in the Minneapolis District.
Turning to business expenditures for plant and equipment, the pace of such outlays by and large continues to lack vigor, but there is growing evidence that a pickup in this sector might be getting under way. Thus, among others, Cleveland reports rising activity in the machine tool, communications equipment, printing equipment and heavy duty truck industries. Chicago reports a pickup in orders for mining equipment, a further expansion of planned equipment purchases by auto companies, and alludes to the prospects that various major projects kept on the ""back burner"" by the food processing, paper, chemical, and glass industries might be activated this year. Although St. Louis characterizes prospects for capital spending as mixed, it reports several announcements of sizable investment plans for 1977, and Atlanta reports that new industrial expansion continues rapid in its District. About one third of the manufacturers surveyed monthly by Philadelphia plan increases in capital expenditures over the coming months. Respondents in the San Francisco District feel that tax incentives would have positive, albeit slight, effects in stimulating capital investments, if such incentives were made a permanent part of the tax structure. Respondents in Dallas and New York felt that major capital outlays would be deferred until the direction of government policy became clearer.
On the dark side, indications of increased upward pressure on prices were reported. Respondents in the Philadelphia monthly survey report that higher prices and costs are somewhat more widespread than in December, while in the latest Cleveland survey, the proportion of respondents expecting price increases remained as high as in the previous two months. Recent price increases in the steel industry are reported to be sticking, according to observers in the Chicago and New York Districts, although respondents indicate discounting of steel prices in the San Francisco District. Reports from agricultural areas of the nation note the relatively low prices currently paid producers for grains and certain other agricultural commodities as a result of record crops. Kansas City reports that earlier concerns over the District's winter wheat crop have been allayed by an extensive snowfall that has provided needed moisture as well as a protective snow cover. While grain prices may thus be held down, farmers are reported to expect rising cattle prices.
The demand for business loans at commercial banks generally continues sluggish, although loans to agriculture strengthened. Inflows into time and savings accounts continue at a high level, with consequent downward pressure on mortgage rates. Several District reports indicate reductions in rates paid on consumer time certificates, or consideration being given to such cuts, and Cleveland reports reductions in rates paid on passbook accounts at banks in several cities of the District.
 This month's District reports strongly suggest that the ""pause"" in the current recovery has ended and that the pace of business activity is regaining momentum. Virtually all reports indicate some improvement in economic activity. Retailers generally enjoyed a good to excellent Christmas season, with sales strengthening markedly toward the close of the season and with continued strength evident in early January. Business inventories appear to be in line with desired levels, except for scattered exceptions. There is additional evidence of strengthening in residential construction. While the capital investment picture remains mixed, there appears to be mounting evidence of an impending improvement in that sector. Prices, however, continue under upward pressures. The demand for commercial loans remains generally sluggish, and inflows into savings deposits continue at a high rate. As it has throughout the current recovery, consumer spending continues to provide the main thrust to the upswing. Retailers on the whole enjoyed a good Christmas season, with general merchandise sales rising above year-ago levels, in line with or exceeding expectations. The retail sales performance varied widely, however, ranging from unexpectedly strong and generally excellent (Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco) to above last year (Philadelphia, New York) and to a more restrained slightly improved (Richmond) and not overly strong (Kansas City). Auto sales, particularly those of standard or large size vehicles, are also mentioned as being particularly brisk by several Banks (including Minneapolis, Atlanta, Kansas City, and San Francisco). Although several Banks note that the improvement was achieved at least in part by dint of markdowns and other aggressive promotional activities, Chicago and New York report that by and large such activities did not reach exceptional proportions. A number of Banks report that the uptrend in sales that emerged as Christmas approached has continued in evidence in the immediate post-holiday period and early January. Atlanta and St. Louis thus report excellent results in post-Christmas promotions, and retail respondents in several Districts are reported to be cautiously optimistic regarding developments over the coming months. Respondents in the Minneapolis District feel that consumer confidence has improved since the election, but retailers in the Philadelphia District look for only moderate growth during 1977, with a sluggish first half. Those comments that were received on residential housing suggest that consumer outlays for new homes continue to gather momentum. San Francisco reports that the residential housing market is very strong and continues to strengthen each month, and Minneapolis notes that District authorizations of new housing are close to 1972's record levels. St. Louis reports homebuilding made considerable progress in that District in 1976 and that prospects are for further gains this year, while Dallas respondents expect homebuilding will continue to be a major source of strength in the southwestern economy. Boston, however, characterizes residential construction as a major weak spot in the New England economy. Inventories at the retail and/or manufacturing level were generally regarded to be about in line with sales and at desired levels, although there are scattered reports of undesirably high stocks of certain items, including some nonferrous metals, furniture, T.V.s, and smaller cars. Few indications of shortages were reported with the exception of an actual or potential dearth of natural gas mentioned by Richmond, Cleveland, and Minneapolis, as well as fuel oil in the Minneapolis District. Turning to business expenditures for plant and equipment, the pace of such outlays by and large continues to lack vigor, but there is growing evidence that a pickup in this sector might be getting under way. Thus, among others, Cleveland reports rising activity in the machine tool, communications equipment, printing equipment and heavy duty truck industries. Chicago reports a pickup in orders for mining equipment, a further expansion of planned equipment purchases by auto companies, and alludes to the prospects that various major projects kept on the ""back burner"" by the food processing, paper, chemical, and glass industries might be activated this year. Although St. Louis characterizes prospects for capital spending as mixed, it reports several announcements of sizable investment plans for 1977, and Atlanta reports that new industrial expansion continues rapid in its District. About one third of the manufacturers surveyed monthly by Philadelphia plan increases in capital expenditures over the coming months. Respondents in the San Francisco District feel that tax incentives would have positive, albeit slight, effects in stimulating capital investments, if such incentives were made a permanent part of the tax structure. Respondents in Dallas and New York felt that major capital outlays would be deferred until the direction of government policy became clearer. On the dark side, indications of increased upward pressure on prices were reported. Respondents in the Philadelphia monthly survey report that higher prices and costs are somewhat more widespread than in December, while in the latest Cleveland survey, the proportion of respondents expecting price increases remained as high as in the previous two months. Recent price increases in the steel industry are reported to be sticking, according to observers in the Chicago and New York Districts, although respondents indicate discounting of steel prices in the San Francisco District. Reports from agricultural areas of the nation note the relatively low prices currently paid producers for grains and certain other agricultural commodities as a result of record crops. Kansas City reports that earlier concerns over the District's winter wheat crop have been allayed by an extensive snowfall that has provided needed moisture as well as a protective snow cover. While grain prices may thus be held down, farmers are reported to expect rising cattle prices. The demand for business loans at commercial banks generally continues sluggish, although loans to agriculture strengthened. Inflows into time and savings accounts continue at a high level, with consequent downward pressure on mortgage rates. Several District reports indicate reductions in rates paid on consumer time certificates, or consideration being given to such cuts, and Cleveland reports reductions in rates paid on passbook accounts at banks in several cities of the District."
1977-02-09,national,overall,"Weather dominated the news in most Districts' reports. Cold weather   drained natural gas supplies and resulted in widespread layoffs in   some Districts, especially Atlanta, Philadelphia, Cleveland,   Chicago, and New York and extensive crop damage in Florida.   Nevertheless, the overall opinion seems to be that the economy shows   signs of strengthening and losses in output and employment will be   made up later in the year. Retail sales were particularly strong in   several areas not affected by the weather, such as San Francisco and   Boston, and also held up in Chicago and St. Louis despite severe   weather. Housing activity shows signs of accelerating. Prices for   manufactured goods are likely to be under upward pressures because   of the high cost of alternate fuels and alternate transportation,   and prices for fruits and vegetables are also expected to   accelerate. Savings flows remain generally strong and rates paid on   deposits are easing in some Districts. Weather dominated the news in most Districts' reports. Cold weather   drained natural gas supplies and resulted in widespread layoffs in   some Districts, especially Atlanta, Philadelphia, Cleveland,   Chicago, and New York and extensive crop damage in Florida.   Nevertheless, the overall opinion seems to be that the economy shows   signs of strengthening and losses in output and employment will be   made up later in the year. Retail sales were particularly strong in   several areas not affected by the weather, such as San Francisco and   Boston, and also held up in Chicago and St. Louis despite severe   weather. Housing activity shows signs of accelerating. Prices for   manufactured goods are likely to be under upward pressures because   of the high cost of alternate fuels and alternate transportation,   and prices for fruits and vegetables are also expected to   accelerate. Savings flows remain generally strong and rates paid on   deposits are easing in some Districts. Natural gas and fuel shortages apparently have their greatest   effects on output and employment in Atlanta, Philadelphia,   Cleveland, Chicago, and New York. An estimated 250,000 to 335,000   layoffs have resulted from fuel shortages in the Atlanta District.   Approximately 175,000 workers were laid off in the Philadelphia   District as a result of curtailments of natural gas and weather-  related problems. Cleveland estimates that about 110,000   manufacturing workers were laid off as of early February,   principally in steel, automotive, glass, and metal fabricating   plants. Chicago notes that the most serious impact has been on steel   plants in Indiana, where over 40,000 workers were laid off early in   February. Automotive assembly plants in Michigan had layoffs because   of parts shortages. Chicago and Cleveland said that many   manufacturers have switched to alternate fuels, but deliveries have   been slowed by frozen waterways and lack of carriers. As these   deliveries have improved, many laid off workers have been recalled.   New York also notes cutbacks in output and employment, especially in   Buffalo and Rochester. Slight to moderate effects of fuel shortages were noted in Richmond   and St. Louis, but other Districts, including Boston, Minneapolis,   and Dallas, were relatively unaffected either because alternate fuel   supplies have been available or weather conditions have not been   abnormal. Despite widespread effects of fuel shortages and abnormal   conditions, the tone of District reports still seems to indicate   that losses in output and employment will eventually be recovered   and economic activity will continue to strengthen. New York remarks   that ""business economists viewed the decline in production and   employment as a temporary disruption,"" and Cleveland points out   economists who met at that Bank on February 3 expect the expansion   to continue through 1977 despite constraints on fuel supplies. The   latest surveys by the Philadelphia and Richmond Banks indicate that   respondents expect continued improvement in economic activity at   least through the first half of 1977. Consumer spending has been notably strong in some Districts, but   fell sharply in some others especially in the last few weeks of the   cold weather period. Boston, Chicago, St. Louis, and San Francisco   note that retail sales in the last 2 months were strong; but New   York and Philadelphia comment that sales in the last 2 weeks of   January and early February fell sharply, apparently in response to   severe weather. Retailers, although optimistic, are concerned over   effects of high fuel bills on discretionary spending. Construction activity, especially housing, appears to show signs of   accelerating. Substantial strength in housing starts is noted in   Dallas and San Francisco. Forecasts of housing starts in the Chicago   District have been increased because of the large volume of funds   available from savings and loan associations and life insurance   companies. Dallas remarks that one homebuilder plans to boost starts   by a fourth this year in Dallas, Ft. Worth, and Houston. Starts in   several areas of the San Francisco District have increased 30 to 50   percent from last year. Both Dallas and Atlanta report mobile home   sales have strengthened. Similarly, signs of revival in multi-family   construction are noted in the southwest and west coast areas.   Shortages of building materials, including lumber, brick, cement,   plastic pipe, wallboard, and insulation, may develop this year   according to Chicago and Dallas. Adverse weather conditions in Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San   Francisco have caused extensive damage to crops and concern over   future prospects for agriculture in those Districts. Florida's   fruit, sugar cane, and vegetable crops, except celery and lettuce,   have been severely damaged by freezing weather. Citrus fruit losses   are estimated between 25 and 35 percent of the unharvested crop.   Last year's drought and lack of moisture caused considerable concern   to farmers and bankers in the Minneapolis District. Low farm   commodities prices and low production in drought-stricken areas are   cutting farm spending. The need for refinancing appears to have   increased, but bankers are concerned about the ability of farmers to   continue payments even on existing loans. Lack of rainfall in the   west is curtailing hydro-electric power output. According to San   Francisco, the Bonneville Power Administration has stopped the flow   of interruptible power to aluminum and chemical plants in the   northwest and plans for allocating water to farm and residential   areas are underway in most States. Agriculture prices will   apparently be under upward price pressures because of adverse   weather conditions. Sharp increases in prices for agricultural   commodities this year are expected by San Francisco, and Atlanta   points out that vegetable, citrus crops, and livestock prices are   likely to increase as a result of a severe freeze in Florida.   However, ample supplies of red meat and pork should hold down   increases in overall food prices, at least for the first half of   1977 according to Kansas City. Large beef supplies in the first half   are likely to be followed by smaller supplies and higher prices in   the second half of 1977. Upward price pressures on industrial   commodities are likely to intensify because of higher costs of   alternate fuel oil and higher costs of alternate modes of   transportation. Business loan demand remains generally sluggish in Districts that   commented. However, a considerable pickup in credit demand from oil   distributors to finance inventories is noted in Philadelphia, and   Kansas City notes strong loan demand by coal mining and oil drilling   firms. Easing in rates paid on time and savings deposits and on   saving certificates has occurred in Dallas and St. Louis; but some   thrift institutions in Cleveland, which only last month reduced   rates on passbook savings accounts and on certificates, raised rates   because of loss of deposits."
1977-03-09,national,overall,"
The overall impression that emerges from this month's district     reports is that the economy is recovering smartly from the     disruptions caused by the bitter weather earlier in the year.     Production has rebounded quickly, and laid off workers have returned     to the job with the onset of more temperate weather. Retail trade     generally shows strength, factory orders are reported to be rising,     and a rebuilding of business inventories may be getting underway.     There were also scattered reports of a strengthening of the business     capital investment picture. On the darker side, however, there     appeared to be increased apprehension over inflationary pressures,     as the drought in the western states threatens to add higher food     prices to higher fuel prices.
The impact of the weather-induced disruptions appears to be short-lived. Cleveland, for example, reports that economic activity in the     district is recovering rapidly from the severe winter, with     respondents from industries hardest hit by fuel shortages—steel,     automobile, appliance, and glass—generally expecting losses in     output to be recouped over the next few months. Economic activity in     the Chicago district has returned to near normal levels, with many     manufacturers, particularly in the steel and auto industry, working     full speed to overcome shortfalls in output. St. Louis reports that     although weather conditions and natural gas shortages hampered     activity of some firms in January, the return of normal weather has     alleviated most of the problems. Similar sentiments were expressed     by New York respondents.
It appears, on balance, that weather related disruptions of     industrial activity turned out to be less acute than had been     feared. Boston states that New England industry escaped relatively     unscathed, with only isolated production slowdowns, and Philadelphia     reports only moderate disruptions at the relatively small group of     firms affected—mostly in the primary metal and food product     industries. Richmond and Kansas City report that weather-related     difficulties were not widespread, and Atlanta reports only minor     disruptions. Finally, Minneapolis reports the cold weather had no     significant impact on its district's industrial activity, which     indeed expanded further.
The consumer spending picture is generally favorable. Chicago     characterizes retail sales of both durables and nondurables as     excellent, and St. Louis reports February sales to be running     somewhat above the particularly high February 1976 pace. Dallas sees     continued strength in department store sales, and notes that     merchants are generally optimistic. Richmond reports similar     sentiment. On the other hand, sales were apparently mixed in the     Philadelphia district in February.
Consumer outlays on new homes also appear to be on the upswing.     Chicago reports that demand for housing, especially for single-family homes, is very strong, and residential building is up in     urban areas of the Minneapolis district, where a healthy amount of     residential construction is expected for 1977. San Francisco reports     that construction activity continues strong in most western states.     On the other hand, commercial and industrial construction generally     continues sluggish, although Atlanta reports increases in     nonresidential construction activity in some parts of the district.
Regarding business sales, Boston reports a particularly high level     of new orders for hardware, machine tools, and appliances, and St.     Louis notes a rise in the sale of chemical goods and commercial     aircraft. Manufacturers in the Richmond district report a high level     of orders, particularly for chemicals and primary metals, and as a     group seem more optimistic than at any time in the past several     years. Similarly, Philadelphia reports that manufacturing     respondents report increases in orders and that most of these     respondents expected further expansion over the coming months;     Minneapolis reports manufacturing sales up 18 percent from a year     before, with respondents expecting sales to exceed year-earlier     levels over the coming months.
A period of inventory rebuilding may be getting underway. Chicago     notes that many manufacturers and some retailers have already begun     to rebuild depleted inventories. Philadelphia reports that retail     inventories are in good shape and that higher levels of inventories     are projected by manufacturers. Minneapolis respondents are     generally content with current inventory levels, while manufacturing     respondents in the Richmond survey of business conditions suggest     the most comfortable inventory positions in almost a year.
Business outlays for plant and equipment generally still appear     sluggish, although there was some limited evidence of a     strengthening in that sector. Several respondents in the New York     district expected some increase in plant and equipment outlays later     in the year, partly reflecting a shift by some producers to     alternative energy sources for their plants. Respondents in the     Richmond and Philadelphia districts also expected some increase over     the coming months, while Chicago notes that capital expenditure     programs probably have increased somewhat but that uncertainties     continue to hamper such spending.
On the darker side, respondents in over half of the districts looked     for a heightening of inflationary pressures, particularly in view of     the drought in the western states. Concern over possible damage to     crops due to the lack of moisture is mentioned by Kansas City, San     Francisco, and Minneapolis and, to a lesser extent, Chicago and St.     Louis.
 
The overall impression that emerges from this month's district     reports is that the economy is recovering smartly from the     disruptions caused by the bitter weather earlier in the year.     Production has rebounded quickly, and laid off workers have returned     to the job with the onset of more temperate weather. Retail trade     generally shows strength, factory orders are reported to be rising,     and a rebuilding of business inventories may be getting underway.     There were also scattered reports of a strengthening of the business     capital investment picture. On the darker side, however, there     appeared to be increased apprehension over inflationary pressures,     as the drought in the western states threatens to add higher food     prices to higher fuel prices.
The impact of the weather-induced disruptions appears to be short-lived. Cleveland, for example, reports that economic activity in the     district is recovering rapidly from the severe winter, with     respondents from industries hardest hit by fuel shortages—steel,     automobile, appliance, and glass—generally expecting losses in     output to be recouped over the next few months. Economic activity in     the Chicago district has returned to near normal levels, with many     manufacturers, particularly in the steel and auto industry, working     full speed to overcome shortfalls in output. St. Louis reports that     although weather conditions and natural gas shortages hampered     activity of some firms in January, the return of normal weather has     alleviated most of the problems. Similar sentiments were expressed     by New York respondents.
It appears, on balance, that weather related disruptions of     industrial activity turned out to be less acute than had been     feared. Boston states that New England industry escaped relatively     unscathed, with only isolated production slowdowns, and Philadelphia     reports only moderate disruptions at the relatively small group of     firms affected—mostly in the primary metal and food product     industries. Richmond and Kansas City report that weather-related     difficulties were not widespread, and Atlanta reports only minor     disruptions. Finally, Minneapolis reports the cold weather had no     significant impact on its district's industrial activity, which     indeed expanded further.
The consumer spending picture is generally favorable. Chicago     characterizes retail sales of both durables and nondurables as     excellent, and St. Louis reports February sales to be running     somewhat above the particularly high February 1976 pace. Dallas sees     continued strength in department store sales, and notes that     merchants are generally optimistic. Richmond reports similar     sentiment. On the other hand, sales were apparently mixed in the     Philadelphia district in February.
Consumer outlays on new homes also appear to be on the upswing.     Chicago reports that demand for housing, especially for single-family homes, is very strong, and residential building is up in     urban areas of the Minneapolis district, where a healthy amount of     residential construction is expected for 1977. San Francisco reports     that construction activity continues strong in most western states.     On the other hand, commercial and industrial construction generally     continues sluggish, although Atlanta reports increases in     nonresidential construction activity in some parts of the district.
Regarding business sales, Boston reports a particularly high level     of new orders for hardware, machine tools, and appliances, and St.     Louis notes a rise in the sale of chemical goods and commercial     aircraft. Manufacturers in the Richmond district report a high level     of orders, particularly for chemicals and primary metals, and as a     group seem more optimistic than at any time in the past several     years. Similarly, Philadelphia reports that manufacturing     respondents report increases in orders and that most of these     respondents expected further expansion over the coming months;     Minneapolis reports manufacturing sales up 18 percent from a year     before, with respondents expecting sales to exceed year-earlier     levels over the coming months.
A period of inventory rebuilding may be getting underway. Chicago     notes that many manufacturers and some retailers have already begun     to rebuild depleted inventories. Philadelphia reports that retail     inventories are in good shape and that higher levels of inventories     are projected by manufacturers. Minneapolis respondents are     generally content with current inventory levels, while manufacturing     respondents in the Richmond survey of business conditions suggest     the most comfortable inventory positions in almost a year.
Business outlays for plant and equipment generally still appear     sluggish, although there was some limited evidence of a     strengthening in that sector. Several respondents in the New York     district expected some increase in plant and equipment outlays later     in the year, partly reflecting a shift by some producers to     alternative energy sources for their plants. Respondents in the     Richmond and Philadelphia districts also expected some increase over     the coming months, while Chicago notes that capital expenditure     programs probably have increased somewhat but that uncertainties     continue to hamper such spending.
On the darker side, respondents in over half of the districts looked     for a heightening of inflationary pressures, particularly in view of     the drought in the western states. Concern over possible damage to     crops due to the lack of moisture is mentioned by Kansas City, San     Francisco, and Minneapolis and, to a lesser extent, Chicago and St.     Louis.
 The overall impression that emerges from this month's district     reports is that the economy is recovering smartly from the     disruptions caused by the bitter weather earlier in the year.     Production has rebounded quickly, and laid off workers have returned     to the job with the onset of more temperate weather. Retail trade     generally shows strength, factory orders are reported to be rising,     and a rebuilding of business inventories may be getting underway.     There were also scattered reports of a strengthening of the business     capital investment picture. On the darker side, however, there     appeared to be increased apprehension over inflationary pressures,     as the drought in the western states threatens to add higher food     prices to higher fuel prices. The impact of the weather-induced disruptions appears to be short-lived. Cleveland, for example, reports that economic activity in the     district is recovering rapidly from the severe winter, with     respondents from industries hardest hit by fuel shortages—steel,     automobile, appliance, and glass—generally expecting losses in     output to be recouped over the next few months. Economic activity in     the Chicago district has returned to near normal levels, with many     manufacturers, particularly in the steel and auto industry, working     full speed to overcome shortfalls in output. St. Louis reports that     although weather conditions and natural gas shortages hampered     activity of some firms in January, the return of normal weather has     alleviated most of the problems. Similar sentiments were expressed     by New York respondents. It appears, on balance, that weather related disruptions of     industrial activity turned out to be less acute than had been     feared. Boston states that New England industry escaped relatively     unscathed, with only isolated production slowdowns, and Philadelphia     reports only moderate disruptions at the relatively small group of     firms affected—mostly in the primary metal and food product     industries. Richmond and Kansas City report that weather-related     difficulties were not widespread, and Atlanta reports only minor     disruptions. Finally, Minneapolis reports the cold weather had no     significant impact on its district's industrial activity, which     indeed expanded further. The consumer spending picture is generally favorable. Chicago     characterizes retail sales of both durables and nondurables as     excellent, and St. Louis reports February sales to be running     somewhat above the particularly high February 1976 pace. Dallas sees     continued strength in department store sales, and notes that     merchants are generally optimistic. Richmond reports similar     sentiment. On the other hand, sales were apparently mixed in the     Philadelphia district in February. Consumer outlays on new homes also appear to be on the upswing.     Chicago reports that demand for housing, especially for single-family homes, is very strong, and residential building is up in     urban areas of the Minneapolis district, where a healthy amount of     residential construction is expected for 1977. San Francisco reports     that construction activity continues strong in most western states.     On the other hand, commercial and industrial construction generally     continues sluggish, although Atlanta reports increases in     nonresidential construction activity in some parts of the district. Regarding business sales, Boston reports a particularly high level     of new orders for hardware, machine tools, and appliances, and St.     Louis notes a rise in the sale of chemical goods and commercial     aircraft. Manufacturers in the Richmond district report a high level     of orders, particularly for chemicals and primary metals, and as a     group seem more optimistic than at any time in the past several     years. Similarly, Philadelphia reports that manufacturing     respondents report increases in orders and that most of these     respondents expected further expansion over the coming months;     Minneapolis reports manufacturing sales up 18 percent from a year     before, with respondents expecting sales to exceed year-earlier     levels over the coming months. A period of inventory rebuilding may be getting underway. Chicago     notes that many manufacturers and some retailers have already begun     to rebuild depleted inventories. Philadelphia reports that retail     inventories are in good shape and that higher levels of inventories     are projected by manufacturers. Minneapolis respondents are     generally content with current inventory levels, while manufacturing     respondents in the Richmond survey of business conditions suggest     the most comfortable inventory positions in almost a year. Business outlays for plant and equipment generally still appear     sluggish, although there was some limited evidence of a     strengthening in that sector. Several respondents in the New York     district expected some increase in plant and equipment outlays later     in the year, partly reflecting a shift by some producers to     alternative energy sources for their plants. Respondents in the     Richmond and Philadelphia districts also expected some increase over     the coming months, while Chicago notes that capital expenditure     programs probably have increased somewhat but that uncertainties     continue to hamper such spending. On the darker side, respondents in over half of the districts looked     for a heightening of inflationary pressures, particularly in view of     the drought in the western states. Concern over possible damage to     crops due to the lack of moisture is mentioned by Kansas City, San     Francisco, and Minneapolis and, to a lesser extent, Chicago and St.     Louis."
1977-04-12,national,overall,"The recovery has been solidly reestablished, according to this month's district reports. Manufacturing activity has increased, retail sales are generally good, inventories appear to be at satisfactory levels and there are signs that capital spending is picking up. Deposit inflows continue to be strong, particularly for savings accounts. Loan demand seems to be up overall, but there is considerable variation in the reports on commercial loans. Recent rainfall has eased problems in the agricultural sector, but several districts mention that this area remains a trouble spot. Farmers are caught in a profits squeeze as costs, often drought related, are rising faster than prices. The one rather negative element in this generally favorable picture comes from reports of widespread price increases.Consumer spending continues to be strong. Almost all districts   observed that retail sales are in an upward trend. Large ticket   items such as appliances and furniture were singled out as moving   particularly well by several Banks. (Boston, Richmond, St. Louis and   Minneapolis). Sales of automobiles were reported to be healthy by   Cleveland and Minneapolis, although in New York's district they are   lagging last year. All three Banks observed that standard and   intermediate size cars are in much greater demand than compacts.   When mentioned, inventories were said to be within desired limits.   Boston expressed concern that the tax rebate might lead to an   excessive inventory buildup as a result of temporarily higher sales.
Manufacturing output and employment have picked up. Surveys by   Philadelphia, Richmond and Chicago indicated that new orders and   shipments are higher for many manufacturers. In both Philadelphia   and Richmond this improvement has caused increases in both   employment and the workweek. Cleveland, St. Louis and Minneapolis   also expressed optimism about business prospects. Among the   industries which were observed to have made significant gains in   recent months were primary metals, especially steel, textiles and   chemicals. Manufacturers of apparel and furniture were reported to   be doing well in some districts but not in others.
The outlook for capital spending remains confused but there are   signs of an improvement. Producers of capital goods, particularly   small items, are experiencing increased interest in their products,   but there seems a general reluctance to undertake any large-scale   expansions. Increases in the demand for component capital goods like   bearings, castings and engines were reported by Boston, Cleveland,   Chicago and St. Louis. New York and Chicago observed that steel   sales were strengthening. Boston and San Francisco reported that   sales of aircraft and aircraft equipment were expected to improve;   and Cleveland and Chicago noted a strengthening in orders for   equipment used by the lumber industry. St. Louis indicated that   sales of construction equipment have increased but Cleveland   commented that these were still weak in its district. Despite these   indications that capital spending is picking up, several Banks   expressed dissatisfaction with the level of investment in their   districts. Boston and Richmond noted that there was little interest   in their regions in expanding capacity, New York reported that   capital spending was recovering slowly. Businessmen in its district   are said to feel strongly that investment is being discouraged by   government regulations. Environmental regulations were singled out.   This view was echoed by Chicago and St. Louis: while capital   spending is picking up, government regulations are hindering it.   Similar sentiments were expressed by Kansas City. On the more   positive side, approximately 40 percent of the firms responding to   Philadelphia's survey plan increased capital spending. Kansas City   reported that investment in the energy field has been strong and   will increase if there is a shift from natural gas to coal.   According to Dallas, oil drilling activity is continuing to rise and   the demand for oil field equipment is climbing steadily.
Recent rains have relieved drought conditions in the west, but   several districts remain very concerned about low crop prices and   drought-induced cost increases. Chicago and St. Louis reported that   soil moisture conditions are considerably improved in their   districts and planting is proceeding normally. Minneapolis, Kansas   City, Dallas and San Francisco, on the other hand, reported that   while drought conditions have been alleviated considerably more   moisture is needed. All are concerned about depressed product   prices, particularly for wheat and cattle. These prices in   combination with rising costs have reduced farm income and except in   San Francisco's district have resulted in heavy borrowing at rural   banks.
Financial developments seem generally consistent with other sectors   of the economy. Loan demand appears to have increased with real   estate and consumer loans accounting for most of the gain. Richmond,   Kansas City and San Francisco noted increases in commercial loan   demand; Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis observed that it was flat   or varied throughout the district and Dallas reported a decrease. As   mentioned above, agricultural loans have increased in parts of the   west. Philadelphia reported that banks are receiving inquiries about   fixed rate loans and that one is offering high quality customers   loans at 8 percent with an outside maturity of five years and no   balance requirement. Kansas City noted that in Oklahoma a number of   banks had raised their local prime lending rate from 6 3/4 to 7   percent because of a strong demand for energy-related loans. Deposit   inflows to savings accounts and savings and loan associations are   said to be strong, although they have slowed recently in St. Louis   and Minneapolis.
The ominous note in this month's reports is the widespread price   increases observed in several districts. All the eastern banks—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond and Atlanta—noted that manufacturing prices are increasing. Over half of the   respondents to Philadelphia's survey reported higher materials   prices. Price increases in metals appear to be holding according to   Boston and Cleveland, although Cleveland also noted that producers   of stainless steel withdrew increases announced earlier this month.   Concerns about inflation were apparently quite common among   respondents for New York and Boston, although the academic   economists consulted by Boston believe that recent spurts in prices   are temporary and that the underlying inflation rate is still between 5 and 6 percent.         The recovery has been solidly reestablished, according to this month's district reports. Manufacturing activity has increased, retail sales are generally good, inventories appear to be at satisfactory levels and there are signs that capital spending is picking up. Deposit inflows continue to be strong, particularly for savings accounts. Loan demand seems to be up overall, but there is considerable variation in the reports on commercial loans. Recent rainfall has eased problems in the agricultural sector, but several districts mention that this area remains a trouble spot. Farmers are caught in a profits squeeze as costs, often drought related, are rising faster than prices. The one rather negative element in this generally favorable picture comes from reports of widespread price increases.Consumer spending continues to be strong. Almost all districts   observed that retail sales are in an upward trend. Large ticket   items such as appliances and furniture were singled out as moving   particularly well by several Banks. (Boston, Richmond, St. Louis and   Minneapolis). Sales of automobiles were reported to be healthy by   Cleveland and Minneapolis, although in New York's district they are   lagging last year. All three Banks observed that standard and   intermediate size cars are in much greater demand than compacts.   When mentioned, inventories were said to be within desired limits.   Boston expressed concern that the tax rebate might lead to an   excessive inventory buildup as a result of temporarily higher sales.
Manufacturing output and employment have picked up. Surveys by   Philadelphia, Richmond and Chicago indicated that new orders and   shipments are higher for many manufacturers. In both Philadelphia   and Richmond this improvement has caused increases in both   employment and the workweek. Cleveland, St. Louis and Minneapolis   also expressed optimism about business prospects. Among the   industries which were observed to have made significant gains in   recent months were primary metals, especially steel, textiles and   chemicals. Manufacturers of apparel and furniture were reported to   be doing well in some districts but not in others.
The outlook for capital spending remains confused but there are   signs of an improvement. Producers of capital goods, particularly   small items, are experiencing increased interest in their products,   but there seems a general reluctance to undertake any large-scale   expansions. Increases in the demand for component capital goods like   bearings, castings and engines were reported by Boston, Cleveland,   Chicago and St. Louis. New York and Chicago observed that steel   sales were strengthening. Boston and San Francisco reported that   sales of aircraft and aircraft equipment were expected to improve;   and Cleveland and Chicago noted a strengthening in orders for   equipment used by the lumber industry. St. Louis indicated that   sales of construction equipment have increased but Cleveland   commented that these were still weak in its district. Despite these   indications that capital spending is picking up, several Banks   expressed dissatisfaction with the level of investment in their   districts. Boston and Richmond noted that there was little interest   in their regions in expanding capacity, New York reported that   capital spending was recovering slowly. Businessmen in its district   are said to feel strongly that investment is being discouraged by   government regulations. Environmental regulations were singled out.   This view was echoed by Chicago and St. Louis: while capital   spending is picking up, government regulations are hindering it.   Similar sentiments were expressed by Kansas City. On the more   positive side, approximately 40 percent of the firms responding to   Philadelphia's survey plan increased capital spending. Kansas City   reported that investment in the energy field has been strong and   will increase if there is a shift from natural gas to coal.   According to Dallas, oil drilling activity is continuing to rise and   the demand for oil field equipment is climbing steadily.
Recent rains have relieved drought conditions in the west, but   several districts remain very concerned about low crop prices and   drought-induced cost increases. Chicago and St. Louis reported that   soil moisture conditions are considerably improved in their   districts and planting is proceeding normally. Minneapolis, Kansas   City, Dallas and San Francisco, on the other hand, reported that   while drought conditions have been alleviated considerably more   moisture is needed. All are concerned about depressed product   prices, particularly for wheat and cattle. These prices in   combination with rising costs have reduced farm income and except in   San Francisco's district have resulted in heavy borrowing at rural   banks.
Financial developments seem generally consistent with other sectors   of the economy. Loan demand appears to have increased with real   estate and consumer loans accounting for most of the gain. Richmond,   Kansas City and San Francisco noted increases in commercial loan   demand; Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis observed that it was flat   or varied throughout the district and Dallas reported a decrease. As   mentioned above, agricultural loans have increased in parts of the   west. Philadelphia reported that banks are receiving inquiries about   fixed rate loans and that one is offering high quality customers   loans at 8 percent with an outside maturity of five years and no   balance requirement. Kansas City noted that in Oklahoma a number of   banks had raised their local prime lending rate from 6 3/4 to 7   percent because of a strong demand for energy-related loans. Deposit   inflows to savings accounts and savings and loan associations are   said to be strong, although they have slowed recently in St. Louis   and Minneapolis.
The ominous note in this month's reports is the widespread price   increases observed in several districts. All the eastern banks—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond and Atlanta—noted that manufacturing prices are increasing. Over half of the   respondents to Philadelphia's survey reported higher materials   prices. Price increases in metals appear to be holding according to   Boston and Cleveland, although Cleveland also noted that producers   of stainless steel withdrew increases announced earlier this month.   Concerns about inflation were apparently quite common among   respondents for New York and Boston, although the academic   economists consulted by Boston believe that recent spurts in prices   are temporary and that the underlying inflation rate is still between 5 and 6 percent.         Consumer spending continues to be strong. Almost all districts   observed that retail sales are in an upward trend. Large ticket   items such as appliances and furniture were singled out as moving   particularly well by several Banks. (Boston, Richmond, St. Louis and   Minneapolis). Sales of automobiles were reported to be healthy by   Cleveland and Minneapolis, although in New York's district they are   lagging last year. All three Banks observed that standard and   intermediate size cars are in much greater demand than compacts.   When mentioned, inventories were said to be within desired limits.   Boston expressed concern that the tax rebate might lead to an   excessive inventory buildup as a result of temporarily higher sales. Manufacturing output and employment have picked up. Surveys by   Philadelphia, Richmond and Chicago indicated that new orders and   shipments are higher for many manufacturers. In both Philadelphia   and Richmond this improvement has caused increases in both   employment and the workweek. Cleveland, St. Louis and Minneapolis   also expressed optimism about business prospects. Among the   industries which were observed to have made significant gains in   recent months were primary metals, especially steel, textiles and   chemicals. Manufacturers of apparel and furniture were reported to   be doing well in some districts but not in others. The outlook for capital spending remains confused but there are   signs of an improvement. Producers of capital goods, particularly   small items, are experiencing increased interest in their products,   but there seems a general reluctance to undertake any large-scale   expansions. Increases in the demand for component capital goods like   bearings, castings and engines were reported by Boston, Cleveland,   Chicago and St. Louis. New York and Chicago observed that steel   sales were strengthening. Boston and San Francisco reported that   sales of aircraft and aircraft equipment were expected to improve;   and Cleveland and Chicago noted a strengthening in orders for   equipment used by the lumber industry. St. Louis indicated that   sales of construction equipment have increased but Cleveland   commented that these were still weak in its district. Despite these   indications that capital spending is picking up, several Banks   expressed dissatisfaction with the level of investment in their   districts. Boston and Richmond noted that there was little interest   in their regions in expanding capacity, New York reported that   capital spending was recovering slowly. Businessmen in its district   are said to feel strongly that investment is being discouraged by   government regulations. Environmental regulations were singled out.   This view was echoed by Chicago and St. Louis: while capital   spending is picking up, government regulations are hindering it.   Similar sentiments were expressed by Kansas City. On the more   positive side, approximately 40 percent of the firms responding to   Philadelphia's survey plan increased capital spending. Kansas City   reported that investment in the energy field has been strong and   will increase if there is a shift from natural gas to coal.   According to Dallas, oil drilling activity is continuing to rise and   the demand for oil field equipment is climbing steadily. Recent rains have relieved drought conditions in the west, but   several districts remain very concerned about low crop prices and   drought-induced cost increases. Chicago and St. Louis reported that   soil moisture conditions are considerably improved in their   districts and planting is proceeding normally. Minneapolis, Kansas   City, Dallas and San Francisco, on the other hand, reported that   while drought conditions have been alleviated considerably more   moisture is needed. All are concerned about depressed product   prices, particularly for wheat and cattle. These prices in   combination with rising costs have reduced farm income and except in   San Francisco's district have resulted in heavy borrowing at rural   banks. Financial developments seem generally consistent with other sectors   of the economy. Loan demand appears to have increased with real   estate and consumer loans accounting for most of the gain. Richmond,   Kansas City and San Francisco noted increases in commercial loan   demand; Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis observed that it was flat   or varied throughout the district and Dallas reported a decrease. As   mentioned above, agricultural loans have increased in parts of the   west. Philadelphia reported that banks are receiving inquiries about   fixed rate loans and that one is offering high quality customers   loans at 8 percent with an outside maturity of five years and no   balance requirement. Kansas City noted that in Oklahoma a number of   banks had raised their local prime lending rate from 6 3/4 to 7   percent because of a strong demand for energy-related loans. Deposit   inflows to savings accounts and savings and loan associations are   said to be strong, although they have slowed recently in St. Louis   and Minneapolis. The ominous note in this month's reports is the widespread price   increases observed in several districts. All the eastern banks—Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond and Atlanta—noted that manufacturing prices are increasing. Over half of the   respondents to Philadelphia's survey reported higher materials   prices. Price increases in metals appear to be holding according to   Boston and Cleveland, although Cleveland also noted that producers   of stainless steel withdrew increases announced earlier this month.   Concerns about inflation were apparently quite common among   respondents for New York and Boston, although the academic   economists consulted by Boston believe that recent spurts in prices   are temporary and that the underlying inflation rate is still between 5 and 6 percent.        "
1977-05-10,national,overall,"The firmer tone asserted in last month's REDBOOK was generally confirmed by developments in the recent period. Eleven districts reported further increases in output, employment, and new orders. Cleveland and Philadelphia reported a slower rate of rise, however. Minneapolis found ""little change"" in nonagricultural activity. All districts attempted to assess the impact of the Administration's energy program, as requested by the Board telegram of April 27, with interesting but inconclusive results. In general, the strongest reports were from the Sunbelt districts, especially Dallas. Business inventories are in reasonable balance and are expected to rise. Capital spending is moving up, with emphasis on new equipment. Inflation fears are increasing, although in varying degree. Thefrenzied boom in single-family homes is virtually universal. Agricultural prospects have improved with recent rains in the Midwest and Northwest. Demand for consumer, real estate, and agricultural loans is strong, but demand for business loans is still relatively weak.A sampling of opinions finds the Administration's energy program   praised for its note of urgency, and for its objective of curtailing   demand through taxes and higher prices. It is criticized for   complexity, inadequate incentives to expand supplies of fuel, and   for lack of compromise on the methods and timetables for reaching   environmental goals (Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco). A   number of districts, including Boston, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas   City, and San Francisco reported opinions of some contacts that, by   increasing uncertainties, the proposed program would have some   retarding effect on capital spending. In any case, the program is ""highly tentative"" and is unlikely to be accepted as a package in   its original form. The predominant view appears to be that the   program will have little or no clear effect on either consumer   spending or capital spending, at least not in 1977. Most business   investment plans are fairly well set for the current year. Moreover,   investment programs have been moving toward reducing dependence on   natural gas and toward general energy conservation for at least four   years (emphasized by Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis). These   trends were accelerated by the January fuel crisis.
Retail sales continue at a favorable level. However, a Boston area   retailer reported a drop in sales following the announcement of the   energy program. New York sees ""good prospects"" for the second   quarter. Cleveland reported one view that the cancellation of the   income tax rebate would reduce sales somewhat. No clear impact on   auto sales from the proposed taxes and rebates is apparent.   Philadelphia retail sales were depressed by a transit strike, now   settled. Inventories, overall, are well in line with sales. New York expects   a ""moderate buildup"" in the months ahead. Some Richmond   manufacturers now view inventories as ""inadequate."" Longer lead   times are mentioned by Atlanta and Chicago.
A number of districts, including Boston and St. Louis, see a   continuing improvement in sales of business equipment. Cleveland   reports a ""broader recovery."" San Francisco reports a surge in   demand for commercial airliners that is helping the Seattle area.
Six districts report increased fears of accelerating inflation, but   none expected a near-term return to double-digit inflation once the   effect of the special conditions of the first quarter are overcome.   Supply stringencies are not generally significant at present.   However, current or prospective pressures on capacity were mentioned   for tires (Boston), coal freight cars (Cleveland), building   materials (Dallas), and aluminum (San Francisco).The tremendous market for single-family homes is nationwide, and   prices continue to rise sharply. Vacancy rates are down for Florida   condominiums. Higher mortgage rates are reported by Chicago, St.   Louis, and Dallas. Nonresidential construction remains sluggish in   most districts, but Atlanta finds some improvement, and prospects   for new plants in Texas are very strong, partly because energy is ""believed to be readily available"" there.  Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco emphasized substantial   improvement in farmland moisture conditions, although some areas,   such as Montana and North Dakota, remain parched. Retail trade in   rural areas improved with crop prospects. Soybean plantings are up   in various districts, including Richmond and Minneapolis. Dallas   reports increases in receipts from sales of cotton and soybeans.
Districts reporting on bank loan demand presented a generally   similar picture. Consumer, real estate, and farm loans are strong,   while business loans remain weak or only moderately higher.   Philadelphia, for example, finds business loan volume ""flat or down""   in April, but inquiries and commitments are up, and ""moderate"" increases in business loan volume are expected for the remainder of   the year.
 The firmer tone asserted in last month's REDBOOK was generally confirmed by developments in the recent period. Eleven districts reported further increases in output, employment, and new orders. Cleveland and Philadelphia reported a slower rate of rise, however. Minneapolis found ""little change"" in nonagricultural activity. All districts attempted to assess the impact of the Administration's energy program, as requested by the Board telegram of April 27, with interesting but inconclusive results. In general, the strongest reports were from the Sunbelt districts, especially Dallas. Business inventories are in reasonable balance and are expected to rise. Capital spending is moving up, with emphasis on new equipment. Inflation fears are increasing, although in varying degree. Thefrenzied boom in single-family homes is virtually universal. Agricultural prospects have improved with recent rains in the Midwest and Northwest. Demand for consumer, real estate, and agricultural loans is strong, but demand for business loans is still relatively weak.A sampling of opinions finds the Administration's energy program   praised for its note of urgency, and for its objective of curtailing   demand through taxes and higher prices. It is criticized for   complexity, inadequate incentives to expand supplies of fuel, and   for lack of compromise on the methods and timetables for reaching   environmental goals (Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco). A   number of districts, including Boston, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas   City, and San Francisco reported opinions of some contacts that, by   increasing uncertainties, the proposed program would have some   retarding effect on capital spending. In any case, the program is ""highly tentative"" and is unlikely to be accepted as a package in   its original form. The predominant view appears to be that the   program will have little or no clear effect on either consumer   spending or capital spending, at least not in 1977. Most business   investment plans are fairly well set for the current year. Moreover,   investment programs have been moving toward reducing dependence on   natural gas and toward general energy conservation for at least four   years (emphasized by Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis). These   trends were accelerated by the January fuel crisis.
Retail sales continue at a favorable level. However, a Boston area   retailer reported a drop in sales following the announcement of the   energy program. New York sees ""good prospects"" for the second   quarter. Cleveland reported one view that the cancellation of the   income tax rebate would reduce sales somewhat. No clear impact on   auto sales from the proposed taxes and rebates is apparent.   Philadelphia retail sales were depressed by a transit strike, now   settled. Inventories, overall, are well in line with sales. New York expects   a ""moderate buildup"" in the months ahead. Some Richmond   manufacturers now view inventories as ""inadequate."" Longer lead   times are mentioned by Atlanta and Chicago.
A number of districts, including Boston and St. Louis, see a   continuing improvement in sales of business equipment. Cleveland   reports a ""broader recovery."" San Francisco reports a surge in   demand for commercial airliners that is helping the Seattle area.
Six districts report increased fears of accelerating inflation, but   none expected a near-term return to double-digit inflation once the   effect of the special conditions of the first quarter are overcome.   Supply stringencies are not generally significant at present.   However, current or prospective pressures on capacity were mentioned   for tires (Boston), coal freight cars (Cleveland), building   materials (Dallas), and aluminum (San Francisco).The tremendous market for single-family homes is nationwide, and   prices continue to rise sharply. Vacancy rates are down for Florida   condominiums. Higher mortgage rates are reported by Chicago, St.   Louis, and Dallas. Nonresidential construction remains sluggish in   most districts, but Atlanta finds some improvement, and prospects   for new plants in Texas are very strong, partly because energy is ""believed to be readily available"" there.  Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco emphasized substantial   improvement in farmland moisture conditions, although some areas,   such as Montana and North Dakota, remain parched. Retail trade in   rural areas improved with crop prospects. Soybean plantings are up   in various districts, including Richmond and Minneapolis. Dallas   reports increases in receipts from sales of cotton and soybeans.
Districts reporting on bank loan demand presented a generally   similar picture. Consumer, real estate, and farm loans are strong,   while business loans remain weak or only moderately higher.   Philadelphia, for example, finds business loan volume ""flat or down""   in April, but inquiries and commitments are up, and ""moderate"" increases in business loan volume are expected for the remainder of   the year.
 A sampling of opinions finds the Administration's energy program   praised for its note of urgency, and for its objective of curtailing   demand through taxes and higher prices. It is criticized for   complexity, inadequate incentives to expand supplies of fuel, and   for lack of compromise on the methods and timetables for reaching   environmental goals (Cleveland, Chicago, and San Francisco). A   number of districts, including Boston, Atlanta, St. Louis, Kansas   City, and San Francisco reported opinions of some contacts that, by   increasing uncertainties, the proposed program would have some   retarding effect on capital spending. In any case, the program is ""highly tentative"" and is unlikely to be accepted as a package in   its original form. The predominant view appears to be that the   program will have little or no clear effect on either consumer   spending or capital spending, at least not in 1977. Most business   investment plans are fairly well set for the current year. Moreover,   investment programs have been moving toward reducing dependence on   natural gas and toward general energy conservation for at least four   years (emphasized by Cleveland, Chicago, and Minneapolis). These   trends were accelerated by the January fuel crisis. Retail sales continue at a favorable level. However, a Boston area   retailer reported a drop in sales following the announcement of the   energy program. New York sees ""good prospects"" for the second   quarter. Cleveland reported one view that the cancellation of the   income tax rebate would reduce sales somewhat. No clear impact on   auto sales from the proposed taxes and rebates is apparent.   Philadelphia retail sales were depressed by a transit strike, now   settled.  Inventories, overall, are well in line with sales. New York expects   a ""moderate buildup"" in the months ahead. Some Richmond   manufacturers now view inventories as ""inadequate."" Longer lead   times are mentioned by Atlanta and Chicago. A number of districts, including Boston and St. Louis, see a   continuing improvement in sales of business equipment. Cleveland   reports a ""broader recovery."" San Francisco reports a surge in   demand for commercial airliners that is helping the Seattle area. Six districts report increased fears of accelerating inflation, but   none expected a near-term return to double-digit inflation once the   effect of the special conditions of the first quarter are overcome.   Supply stringencies are not generally significant at present.   However, current or prospective pressures on capacity were mentioned   for tires (Boston), coal freight cars (Cleveland), building   materials (Dallas), and aluminum (San Francisco). The tremendous market for single-family homes is nationwide, and   prices continue to rise sharply. Vacancy rates are down for Florida   condominiums. Higher mortgage rates are reported by Chicago, St.   Louis, and Dallas. Nonresidential construction remains sluggish in   most districts, but Atlanta finds some improvement, and prospects   for new plants in Texas are very strong, partly because energy is ""believed to be readily available"" there.   Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco emphasized substantial   improvement in farmland moisture conditions, although some areas,   such as Montana and North Dakota, remain parched. Retail trade in   rural areas improved with crop prospects. Soybean plantings are up   in various districts, including Richmond and Minneapolis. Dallas   reports increases in receipts from sales of cotton and soybeans. Districts reporting on bank loan demand presented a generally   similar picture. Consumer, real estate, and farm loans are strong,   while business loans remain weak or only moderately higher.   Philadelphia, for example, finds business loan volume ""flat or down""   in April, but inquiries and commitments are up, and ""moderate"" increases in business loan volume are expected for the remainder of   the year."
1977-06-15,national,overall,"The economy continues on a firm upward path, according to this   month's district comments. Retail sales in general remain good, with   the sales of autos and other durables showing particular strength.   Factory orders continue to rise, and a building up of business   inventories could well be underway. At the same time, the capital   spending picture, while not exuberant, has brightened somewhat.   Residential construction remains very strong, but little evidence of   speculation is reported. The outlook for the 1977 harvest is, on   balance, favorable. In the financial area, the demand for consumer   and mortgage credit continues relatively strong, that for business   loans generally weak. The economy continues on a firm upward path, according to this   month's district comments. Retail sales in general remain good, with   the sales of autos and other durables showing particular strength.   Factory orders continue to rise, and a building up of business   inventories could well be underway. At the same time, the capital   spending picture, while not exuberant, has brightened somewhat.   Residential construction remains very strong, but little evidence of   speculation is reported. The outlook for the 1977 harvest is, on   balance, favorable. In the financial area, the demand for consumer   and mortgage credit continues relatively strong, that for business   loans generally weak. Consumer spending generally continues to support the recovery,   although several districts report a mixed performance. Chicago   characterizes retail sales in its district as excellent, with sales   of appliances, domestic large cars and imported small cars   especially strong. Dallas reports department store sales as running   about 14 percent above year-earlier levels, with durable goods   selling especially well and retailers looking for a steady increase   for the rest of the year. Similarly, solid gains in consumer   spending were also reported in the New York, Minneapolis and San   Francisco districts. And Boston indicates that, after rather   disappointing performance in early May, retail sales gained   considerable strength in the second half of the month. On the more   restrained side, Cleveland reports a recent flattening in retail   sales, although new car sales remain strong if off somewhat from the   March and April pace. Richmond finds little change in total sales   during May, but some decline in sales of big ticket items, while   Atlanta reports that retail sales have turned spotty, although car   sales remain robust. Philadelphia finds the pace of sales mixed, but   generally below the expectation of retailers. Housing construction continues very strong, in virtually all   districts, and sharp increases in real estate prices, including   farmland, are widely noted. Against this background, district   reports address themselves to the question of the possible role of   speculation in the current real estate market. With few exceptions,   little or no evidence has been uncovered that speculation has been a   significant factor in that market. Comments from the San Francisco   district in general explain the sharp rise in housing prices as the   result of a surge of post-recession demand confronting a housing   supply reduced by the preceding recession. The influence of   speculation, however, is reported in Southern California, where   speculators may account for an estimated 20 percent of some markets.  Scattered instances of possible speculation are also noted by   Philadelphia and Atlanta. Business sales and manufacturing activity continue strong.   Manufacturing respondents to the Philadelphia monthly survey report   that new orders and shipments are higher in June, and further   increases are expected. Similar sentiments were echoed by   respondents in the Richmond district survey. St. Louis reports that   manufacturing activity continues to register gains in sales and   orders over a wide range of industries, including the chemical, home   building products, and commercial aircraft industries. Dallas   mentions further gains in manufacturing output, and Minneapolis   reports that district manufacturing activity remains quite strong,   with manufacturers responding to its latest survey looking for year-over-year increase in sales of about 15 percent in the first half of   1977.  Against this background, a period of modest inventory rebuilding may   be underway. Manufacturers in the Philadelphia district thus project   an increase in inventories over the balance of the year, and   Richmond reports that manufacturers? inventories, after remaining   flat for several months, are once again moving upward. San Francisco   reports that some industries, including aerospace and electronics,   are cautiously bringing inventories back to ""normal"" levels to   support higher production levels and sales. Minneapolis'  manufacturers in general feel inventories to be in line with   expected sales, as are department store inventories in the Dallas   district. Similarly, Chicago reports inventories of some items,   mainly hard goods, to be below levels necessary to maximize sales.   Growing shortages of drilling equipment are mentioned by Dallas and   Atlanta. Reflecting the continued strength in manufacturing activity,   improvements in the labor market are reported by several Banks,   including Philadelphia, Richmond, Chicago and Minneapolis. Growing   shortages of certain types of skilled workers are mentioned by St.   Louis (carpenters) and Dallas and Atlanta (oil drillers). Assessments of business capital spending generally remain cautious,   but on balance have become somewhat brighter. Among others, Boston   reports increased orders at machine tool manufacturers, as well as   an expansion in the investment plans of New England firms   themselves. Capital good producers in the Cleveland district expect   capital spending in 1977 to at least match that projected by the   latest Department of Commerce survey, in some instance to exceed it.   Chicago reports increased steel shipments to capital equipment   producers as well as a ""well grounded"" upswing in spending on such   equipment, although the strength of demand varies greatly among   industries, with construction leading the way. St. Louis reports   strong sales of machine tools, welding and cutting equipment, and   commercial aircraft. However, the proportion of manufacturers in the   Philadelphia survey anticipating increases in their capital spending   over the next six months declined somewhat. Several Banks including   Cleveland, Minneapolis and New York, mentioned the uncertainties   surrounding the energy program and/or environmental controls as   factors inhibiting capital outlays. Reports from the agricultural areas are generally good. Kansas City   reports that the wheat harvest now underway in that district is   expected to top the 1976 harvest by 15 percent, while Minneapolis   indicates that recent rains have eased concerns about the draught.   San Francisco, on the other hand, reports that the agricultural   sector in that district seems ""resigned"" to a less than good year,   while weather has adversely affected some crops in the Atlantic   district."
1977-07-13,national,overall,"Most districts report continued improvement in economic activity and   a generally optimistic outlook for business. Consumer durables are   still selling well. Manufacturing and residential construction   remain strong. Doubts persist regarding the likely paths of business   investment in inventories and in plant and equipment. In the   agricultural sector, low prices and drought are having depressing   effects on farm income in some areas. The demand for bank loans is   generally strong, but business loans are weak in some districts. Most districts report continued improvement in economic activity and   a generally optimistic outlook for business. Consumer durables are   still selling well. Manufacturing and residential construction   remain strong. Doubts persist regarding the likely paths of business   investment in inventories and in plant and equipment. In the   agricultural sector, low prices and drought are having depressing   effects on farm income in some areas. The demand for bank loans is   generally strong, but business loans are weak in some districts.  Reports on consumer spending vary, although most districts note a   continued high demand for durables. Kansas City says retail sales   are much stronger. St. Louis reports a continued rise, and Chicago a   continued vigor in consumer spending. Boston observes that retail   sales have recovered from a recent slump. Minneapolis finds slowing   growth in retail sales; Richmond reports little change in the level   of retail sales; and Atlanta says retail trade presents a mixed   picture. Philadelphia describes department store sales as uneven,   while New York calls them ""slack"" in June. Strength in durables is   mentioned by New York, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. Louis,   Minneapolis, and Kansas City. Cleveland finds expectations of a   reduced pace of consumer spending during the second half of 1977,   but retailers are reported as optimistic by Kansas City, Boston, New   York, and Minneapolis. In contrast, Philadelphia describes merchants   as generally bearish about the second half as a whole. Summer   tourism is reported as excellent by Minneapolis and Philadelphia,   but as off to a slow start by Atlanta. Manufacturing activity continues to increase, but at an apparent   slower rate. San Francisco finds production still strong in   aerospace and pulp and paper industries. Dallas notes growing   manufacturing output generally, except in transportation equipment.   St. Louis says manufacturing appears to have leveled off somewhat,   and Philadelphia describes conditions in the industrial sector as   only marginally better. But Richmond reports improvement in the   manufacturing sector, especially in machinery and electrical   equipment. Boston says its region's manufacturers are experiencing   strong demand, while Atlanta mentions increased demand for certain   hard goods such as castings. Cleveland reports a mixed recovery   continuing in capital goods industries. An unusual degree .of caution characterizes investments in   inventories and capital projects. New York feels capital spending   plans are slowly gaining momentum, but Philadelphia finds no   substantive change during the month. San Francisco describes   investment plans as mixed, while Richmond finds manufacturers   content with current capacity. Atlanta sees an acceleration in   industrial building activity, but Cleveland projects a weakening in   steel production. Just as inconclusive are the observations on   inventories. St. Louis describes them as being maintained at very   low levels. Boston and Cleveland, however, report possible   overaccumulation. Kansas City, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia   retailers call their inventories satisfactory; Philadelphia and   Richmond manufacturers appear content with their current levels. Residential construction is continuing its boom, according to   reports from Atlanta, New York, Chicago, St. Louis, and Minneapolis.   Dallas and Chicago say high occupancy rates are spurring   construction of office buildings, and New York notes an impressive   recovery in demand for Manhattan real estate. Atlanta finds   commercial construction is increasing. Particularly encouraging were   scattered comments about lower inflation and inflationary   expectations. Philadelphia notes a lessening in upward pressure on   prices. Boston says fears of inflation seem to have abated.   Retailers reporting to Kansas City do not expect inflation to   accelerate. New York observes that builders? concerns about   inflation appear to be waning, and New York respondents do not   expect reimposition of wage-price controls. Dallas, however,   projects no appreciable slowdown in the current rate of inflation. Agricultural developments are touched upon in several district   reports. Minneapolis, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San   Francisco point to low farm prices. Dallas reports reduced cash   flows to Texas farmers due to low wheat prices. Kansas City expects   a large wheat crop, and other crops are reported doing very well by   Chicago, San Francisco, St. Louis, and Minneapolis. Atlanta   indicates heavy losses resulting from drought, and a rise in price   for Florida citrus fruit. Richmond reports being hard-hit by   drought, too, but District farm income is up there nonetheless. Loan demand is reported as strong by Minneapolis, Richmond,   Cleveland, Kansas City, and, at small banks, by St. Louis. St. Louis   finds business loans demand relatively low at large banks, while   Philadelphia says business loan demand is still weak although   consumer loans are generally increasing. San Francisco reports a   very modest growth in business loan demand. Chicago sees little   change in the generally sluggish loan demand for large businesses."
